ESG PERFORMANCE  
SUMMARY AND DATABOOK
FOR THE 52 WEEKS ENDED 26 FEBRUARY

232023About us

Partnering to shift  
the food system

Reducing environmental  

impacts

GROUP ESG 
PERFORMANCE 
SUMMARY AND 
DATABOOK

The Group’s* Environmental, Social 
and Governance (ESG) Performance 
Summary and Databook 2023 provides 
a high-level overview of the Group’s 
impact on the environment, society 
and the economy. The report focuses 
on our performance during the past 
financial period, for the 52 weeks ended 
26 February 2023, and complements 
the information provided in the 2023 
Integrated Annual Report.

This,  our  second  consecutive  ESG  Performance  Summary  and 
Databook, focuses on reporting against performance indicators 
aligned  with  investors  and  all  stakeholders  and  commentators 
ESG expectations. The Group integrates ESG Key Performance 
Indicators into the Group’s “Ekuseni” strategy (see page 20) and 
continues to enhance its disclosure against ESG indicators from 
a  range  of  global  ratings  agencies  and  guidance  documents. 
This includes improving the Group’s disclosure aligned with the 
JSE’s  2022  Sustainability  Disclosure  Guidance,  as  part  of  our 
commitment  to  report  annually  and  comprehensively  against 
relevant  and  credible  international  frameworks.  Our  improved 
data  management  processes  have  enabled  us  to  report 
accurately against a wider scope of metrics.

CONTENTS

Group ESG Performance Summary  
and Databook
About us

Our enduring values
Letter from our Chief Executive Officer
Reflections from our ESG Executive

Our approach to sustainability
Key performance indicators and targets

Partnering to shift the food system

Catering for different customer ESG interests and needs
Building an inclusive supply chain
Supporting ethical and sustainable sourcing
Promoting healthier food choices
Reducing food waste

Reducing environmental impacts

Reducing our carbon footprint
Innovating for more sustainable buildings
Conserving freshwater
Reducing and repurposing waste
Finding solutions to the packaging challenge

Supporting communities

Our ESG contribution
Targeting hunger
Targeting education
Fostering environmental stewardship

Investing in our people

Job security
Health, safety and well-being
Diversity, equity and inclusion
Talent management and development

ESG databook

Sustainability governance
Sustainability strategy
Management approach
Metrics, targets and performance
Group ESG/sustainability performance data

Appendices

Navigating this report

1

1
2
3
4
5

6

6
7
8
9
10

11

12
12
12
13
13

14

15
15
16
17

18

18
19
19
21

22

22
24
28
29
31

42

References data in the appendices from page 30.

Cross-references to our 2023 Integrated Annual Report.

Policies available online via the hyperlink.

Indicates our key performance targets. 

*   Pick n Pay Stores Limited, its subsidiaries and its associates, which 
includes its two main trading subsidiaries, Pick n Pay Retailers (Pty) 
Limited and Boxer Superstores (Pty) Limited (Boxer)

ABOUT US

Highlights

The Group is a retail business in the 
fast-moving consumer goods industry. 
We operate through multiple store 
formats, with stores across South Africa, 
Namibia, Botswana, Zambia, eSwatini, 
Lesotho and Nigeria. Pick n Pay also owns 
a 49% share of Zimbabwean supermarket 
chain, TM Supermarkets.

Over  the  past  56  years,  the  Group  has  built  a  well-respected  and 
sustainable  business.  We  procure  quality  products  at  the  best 
available  prices,  and  our  operating  model  is  supported  by  a  strong 
and  talented  team.  This  enables  us  to  provide  our  customers  with 
a  tailored  range  of  high-quality  food,  grocery,  omnichannel,  liquor, 
clothing  and  general  merchandise  products  at  competitive  prices. 
As part of our omnichannel strategy, our offering now includes both 
scheduled  and  on-demand  online  offerings.  The  Group’s  customer-
led  Ekuseni  strategy  continues  to  achieve  greater  efficiencies  and 
an  improved  customer  offer  through  two  customer-facing  brands, 
driving sustainable value growth for all stakeholders.

The  Group  is  actively  operationalising  sustainable  practices  in  its 
core  activities,  with  an  emphasis  on  fresh  thinking  and  innovation, 
informed by a clear analysis of the significant risks and opportunities 
in creating a resilient business.

Our enduring values

We are passionate about our customers and will 
fight for their rights 

We live by honesty and integrity 

We foster personal growth and opportunity 

We take individual responsibility

We care for and respect each other

We support and participate in our communities

We nurture leadership and vision, and reward 
innovation

We are all accountable

R106.6 billion turnover

1 385 company-owned stores

59 819 employees  
in our company-owned 

operations

R39.1 million  

expenditure on Corporate 
Social Investment (CSI)
Listed on the FTSE/JSE 
Responsible Investment Index
R3.1 billion spend with 

SMMEs during FY23
Level 5 B-BBEE rating
Net zero carbon by 2050 

target (Scope 1 & 2,  

FY22 baseline)

Savings from energy 
conservation exceed  
R2 billion since FY10

Reduced average packaging 

weight for Pick n Pay own brand 
products by 27.5% against our 

2019 baseline

 91.8% of Pick n Pay branded 
packaging is now recyclable  

or reusable

1

Supporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleESG/sustainability  databookAppendicesESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023About us

Partnering to shift  
the food system

Reducing environmental  

impacts

LETTER FROM  
OUR CHIEF 
EXECUTIVE 
OFFICER

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

Stringent  environmental  targets  further  strengthen  our  value 
proposition.  Savings  from  energy  conservation  now  exceeds  
R2  billion  since  FY10.  Our  reliance  on  keeping  our  stores  and 
distribution centres operating and to sustain the cold chain during 
load-shedding has unfortunately impacted our carbon emissions. 
We are pursuing partnerships with landlords and others to scale 
the renewable transition across the Group. 

leading 

 Accelerating  Boxer  Growth:  Already  the 
limited-range 
in  Africa,  Boxer’s  growth  has  been  phenomenal 
discounter 
and  underscores  our  recognition  of  growth  opportunities 
in 
underserved  markets.  Boxer  sales  increased  by  20.2%  and  we 
opened  60  new  Boxer  stores  in  FY23.  As  Boxer  continues  to  
grow, maintaining the simplicity of our model is crucial for a competitive 
advantage. Our challenge is to harmonise ESG standards across the 
Group, while simultaneously increasing affordability and inclusion. 

 Omnichannel  and  Digital  Leadership:  Digital 
technologies 
help  us  scale  our  positive  social  and  environmental  impact.  
Pick  n  Pay  has  also  expanded  its  on-demand  grocery  offer 
through two digital platforms; our internally generated asap! and 
our  grocery  offer  on  Takealot’s  platform  Mr  D.  Direct-to-home 
delivery has the prospect of lowering Scope 3 carbon emissions.1 
We are presently engaging with Takealot on a transition to e-bikes 
which  would  reduce  our  delivery  footprint  accordingly.  Digital 
platforms  also  enhance  sustainability 
Improved 
inventory  and  returns  management  reduce  waste;  streamlined 
engagement  and  feedback  channels  provide  better  customer 
insight,  including  more  sustainable  choices;  and  better  data 
management enhances ESG tracking and disclosure. 

integration. 

 Project Future – Funding our Strategic Ambitions: The Group’s 
modernisation  and  efficiency  plan  already 
incorporates 
environmental factors, such as energy, water and waste reduction. 
Ekuseni strategy encompasses a range of projects focused on 
improving efficiency, increasing flexibility, and reducing costs by 
R3 billion. R800 million in Ekuseni savings were achieved in FY23. 
Growing investor ESG awareness is now opening our access to 
preferential terms and lines of funding. This prospect accelerated 
our shift to science-based targets for greenhouse gas emissions 
and our commitment to disclosure in terms of the Taskforce on 
Climate-related Financial Disclosures.

 Winning  through  People:  In  growing  future-fit,  high-performing 
teams,  we  know  that  talented  young  people  are  attracted  to 
companies  with  a  social  purpose  and  ambition.  Our  people 
strategy  embraces  learning  and  development,  effective  hybrid 
working, and diversity. More than 4 000 jobs were created in our 
Boxer, Clothing and Online growth engines. Our people strategy 
embraces learning and development, effective hybrid working, and 
diversity. Our drive for Junior Store Management modernisation 
will  deliver  greater  efficiency  and  clarity.  ESG  pressures  have 
accelerated  rapidly,  and  transitions  are  taking  some  people 
beyond their comfort zones. There will be room for improvement, 
and we provide space for reflection and learning along the way.

1  MIT’s Real Estate Innovation Lab

Pieter Boone
Chief Executive Officer

My  career  began  as  a  management  trainee  for  the  largest  family-
owned retailer in the Netherlands. Over the decades, new roles allowed 
me to expand my perspective of business and markets. My invitation 
to join the Group came at the start of the Covid-19 lockdown in 2020.  
I knew Pick n Pay as a loved brand, with Boxer, Pick n Pay Clothing, and 
Omnichannel as its growth engines. This, coupled with the remarkable 
beauty and diversity of this country, greatly influenced my decision 
to accept this position.  

My tenure as CEO is just short of two years now. During this time, my 
team and I have refocused the Group’s value proposition, modernising 
the  Pick  n  Pay  store  estate,  targeting  stronger  like-for-like  sales 
growth and market share gains through a Customer Value Proposition 
(CVP) tailored to meet the individual needs of the customers served. 
This  has  been  done  through  the  Ekuseni  strategy,  and  I  am  very 
pleased with the progress so far. Sustainability integration has been 
central  to  this  transition.  The  introduction  of  the  customer  value 
proposition (CVP) strategy has resulted in the decoupling of the Pick n 
Pay brand. Our brand decoupling was driven in part by the urgent need 
for affordable basic nutrition in this country. Load-shedding continues 
to have a severe impact. There is growing awareness of water security 
and its implications, notably for fresh produce. Demand for ethical and 
sustainable products lags behind European markets, but is steadily on 
the rise. 

These trends keep sustainability at the core of our Ekuseni strategy. 
Launched in May 2022, it focused on serving more customers better 
and empowering our employees, while reducing our negative impact 
on the environment. Each element of Ekuseni includes opportunities 
for positive social or environmental impact.

The five key pillars of the Ekuseni Strategy
 A  Refined  and  Strengthened  CVP  for  Pick  n  Pay:  The 
1. 
successful  launch  of  the  new  customer-facing  supermarket 
banners,  Pick  n  Pay  and  QualiSave,  has  sharpened  our 
focus  on  ESG  factors  most  material  to  the  customer  base. 
Pick n Pay stores, through its two trading banners Pick n Pay 
and  QualiSave,  offer  18  000  products,  with  an  emphasis  on 
quality, innovation and freshness. We are expanding our green 
and  sustainably  sourced  product  ranges,  such  as  Live  Well 
and Eat Well. QualiSave stores offer a tailored range of 8 000 
products,  with  emphasis  on  essentials  and  a  solid  offering  of 
fresh  produce.  Decreased  complexity  has  reduced  costs  and 
improved  efficiencies.  This  is  critical  in  volatile  commodity 
markets where events, including the protracted war in Ukraine, 
impact the availability and costs of staples such as cooking oil 
and maize. Viable innovations explored in Pick n Pay ranges can 
be  reverse-engineered  into  the  value  segment  of  the  market.  
By growing salads hydroponically, we can eliminate pesticides 
and  extend  shelf  life.  We  have  a  large  gluten-free  range  at  
Pick  n  Pay.  In  each  case,  we  share  stories  and  insights  to 
encourage a positive change in behaviour.

in 

I  see  collaborative  action 
Looking  ahead, 
growing 
importance.  A  blended  value 
proposition  requires  partnerships,  as  our 
decision to bring the vendor network on board 
at  an  early  stage  has  shown.  Engagement 
beyond  the  value  chain  is  imperative  and  
I  stand  fully  behind  the  call  to  action  in  the 
Retail  CEO  letter  to  President  Ramaphosa  on 
the energy crisis. We have all heard warnings 
of 8 load-shedding for this coming winter, and 
the  paralysing  impact  this  may  have  on  the 
country. As food chains are impacted, declining 
food  supply  will  threaten  social  stability.  This 
obvious chain of logic lies behind our ongoing 
collaborative outreach to government.

Beyond  structural  work  to  fix  the  electricity 
system,  I  see  the  need  for  a  common  agenda 
between  business  and  government.  Greater 
recognition  will  allow  us  to  increase  the  pace 
of social and environmental delivery. This does 
not  require  financial  investment  by  the  state, 
but could take the form of incentives or a points 
system.  As  a  member  of  the  global  Consumer 
Goods  Forum, 
I  see  this  approach  gaining 
traction, driven by companies such as Unilever 
and PepsiCo. I recognise that we are some way 
off such an agenda in this country, but it could 
play an important role in finding a way forward.

We  continue  to  be  challenged  by  stakeholder 
groups  whose  expectations  exceed  what  we 
can reasonably deliver at any given time. These 
stakeholders  play  an  important  role  in  driving 
us and to them I say, rest assured that this is 
on our strategic agenda. My team engages on a 
weekly and monthly basis in making the Group’s 
sustainability  transition  more  effective  and 
more viable. We seek to achieve this across a 
very big network in a way that does not disrupt 
the supply of healthy food and other essentials 
to all South Africans. 

I believe this is possible, as do the many teams 
that  comprise  our  Group.  From  the  Board 
through to the shopfloor, I thank them for their 
unwavering  support  and  hard  work.  We  are 
making important inroads and I am heartened 
to feel the growing positive energy within the 
organisation. May we continue to live life to the 
fullest and serve through our collective efforts.

Pieter Boone
Chief Executive Officer

14 June 2023

Vaughan Pierce
Executive: ESG (Sustainability, 
Stakeholder and Community)

REFLECTIONS FROM OUR ESG EXECUTIVE
I am delighted to present the Group’s ESG 2023 Performance Summary and Databook. As a Group, 
we  believe  that  success  lies  not  only  in  financial  achievements  but  also  in  our  ability  to  create  a 
positive  impact  on  the  world  around  us.  Today,  we  want  to  share  our  unwavering  commitment  to 
Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) principles, which are deeply embedded in our Group ESG 
DNA and strategy.
As  a  responsible  retailer,  we  recognise  the  urgent  need  to  address  environmental  challenges.  Our 
commitment to sustainability is unwavering, and we are constantly striving to minimise our ecological 
footprint through innovative initiatives and adopting eco-friendly practices across our operations. We 
continue  to  explore  packaging  alternatives,  support  responsible  waste  management,  and  invest  in 
initiatives that drive biodiversity conservation. By embracing circular economy principles, we aim to 
build a greener future for generations to come.
The Group has long embraced the belief that “Doing Good is Good Business” and has been quietly 
first to market in many sustainability arenas. Legacies aside, stakeholder expectations continue 
to grow, and our insight into what Group-wide sustainability integration requires must follow. One 
year into my role, the value of ongoing access to the Board is clear. Integration requires top-down 
and bottom-up effort and we are seeing significant movement as a result. 
Operating under pressure also highlights the importance of context. Sustainability is multi-faceted, 
and our customers have different priorities. Decoupling our brands has allowed us to respond to these 
priorities better, showing the link between sustainability and customer experience. 
We understand the importance of social responsibility and its impact on the well-being of our 
employees, customers, and communities. We are dedicated to fostering an inclusive and diverse 
workplace where all individuals are treated with respect and dignity. We prioritise the health 
and safety of our employees, investing in comprehensive training programmes and fostering 
a culture of care. Our commitment extends beyond our own organisation. We actively engage 
in community development, supporting education, healthcare, and social initiatives that uplift 
disadvantaged communities. Together with our customers, we drive positive change through 
initiatives that address food security, access to education, and social empowerment. 
Our  supply  chain  and  the  products  it  delivers  have  been  a  key  focus  this  year,  with  ongoing 
exploration of opportunities for increased local production, black economic empowerment, and 
environmental and social standards. We have renewed our truck leasing programme and have 
engaged Mercedes for new low-emission vehicles. We are currently also piloting a gas-powered 
vehicle with solar-cooled refrigeration, which we plan to roll out should the pilot prove successful.  
The  integration  of  ESG  KPIs  into  the  Ekuseni  strategy  has  been  an  important  milestone  in  this 
journey.  As  executive  and  staff  awareness  grows,  we  spend  more  time  with  middle  managers 
who  are  critical  players  in  waste  reduction.  Large  cold  chains  require  constant  attention  to 
ordering,  logistics  and  temperature  management.  As  each  person  plays  their  part,  we  are 
seeing  how  employee  wellness  is  impacted  by  our  ability  to  contribute  to  a  bigger  purpose.  
I  believe  this  positive  energy  makes  ESG  performance  a  good  indicator  of  overall  management 
competence and capability. 
As we progress on our ESG journey, we remain committed to continuous improvement and open 
dialogue. We value your feedback as we strive to integrate ESG considerations into our strategic 
decision-making  processes.  By  aligning  our  business  objectives  with  sustainable  practices, 
we  believe  we  can  drive  long-term  value  creation  while  positively  impacting  society  and  the 
environment. Please contact me at sustainability@pnp.co.za with any feedback or questions on 
our 2023 ESG Performance Summary and Databook.
 Vaughan Pierce
Executive: ESG (Sustainability, Stakeholder and Community)

14 June 2023

2

3

www.pnp.co.zaSupporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleESG/sustainability  databookAppendicesESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023OUR APPROACH TO SUSTAINABILITY 

Our sustainability efforts continue to grow our positive contribution in reducing the 
impact of large-scale social and environmental challenges in our target markets.  
A holistic approach is needed, and ESG is increasingly considered in every decision. 
Our focus is on managing material ESG risks and on driving positive impact through 
our core business model. We work in partnership, harnessing our brands, retail store 
network, supply chains and stakeholder relationships in support of collective action.

Our strategic ESG framework
Our  strategic  ESG  framework  focuses  decision-making  and  action 
across  the  Group.  The  framework  provides  a  view  on  the  business 
and our Ekuseni strategic plan in the context of our relationships with 
society and nature. It aligns with the six UN Sustainable Development 
Goals where we believe we can have the biggest positive impact.

Partnering to shift the food system
Food is a basic human need. Meeting this need sustainably requires 
a big picture view and the ability to work with multiple players across 
the  system.  As  a  large  retailer,  we  are  able  to  play  an  influential 
role  both  up  and  down  the  value  chain.  Through  many  coordinated 
interventions, we are focused on:

 • An on-demand grocery offer
 • Affordability of basic goods, targeted through trading under two 

supermarket banners and cost reduction

 • Promoting healthy eating and lifestyles
 •

Increasing the sustainability attributes of products and product 
ranges

 • Supply chain inclusion, with significant support for smaller, 

 • Working with all suppliers to ensure responsible and ethical 

local suppliers

production practices
 • Reducing food waste

Reducing environmental impact
We  provide  a  wide  range  of  products  to  consumers.  Each  of  these 
products  impacts  the  environment  at  virtually  every  stage  of  the 
product life cycle. Our teams work together systematically to reduce 
this impact through:

 • Decarbonising the value chain
 • Energy and water efficiency
 • Removing harmful chemicals, particularly in refrigerants
 • Waste reduction, recycling and reuse, with a focus on packaging

Supporting communities
South  Africa  continues  to  be  challenged  by  stark  inequalities 
and  many  people  struggle  to  access  what  they  need  each  day. 
Our  corporate  social  investment  approach  is  based  on  long-term 
partnerships and focuses on:

 • Supporting educational initiatives
 • Promoting awareness of social and environmental issues
 • Responding to household food insecurity, including crisis 

interventions through store community support and Feed the 
Nation Foundation

 • Boxer’s small-scale farmers initiative which supports local 

farmers and emerging small businesses

Investing in our people
The  Group’s  operations  engage  thousands  of  employees  and 
suppliers, and millions of customers. We are committed to creating 
quality jobs and promoting diversity, equity and inclusion. Together 
with our local and global network of investors and peers, we continue 
to  advocate  for  collective  action  in  support  of  pressing  social  and 
environmental goals, focusing on:

 • Quality jobs and working conditions, effective training, 
competitive remuneration and opportunity to progress

 • Diversity, equity and inclusion, with a focus on alignment with 

B-BBEE provisions

 • Stakeholder engagement and outreach, including advocacy 

initiatives together with retail peers

Our  ESG/Sustainability  Databook  at  the  end  of  this 
report includes our response to the narrative disclosures of the 
JSE’s  2022  Sustainability  Disclosure  Guidance.  This  includes 
detailed information on our approach to:

 Sustainability governance

 Sustainability strategy

 Management approach

 Metrics, targets and performance

4

KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS  
AND TARGETS

The following table provides an indication of performance for each intervention area. 
Further ESG data is available in our 

 ESG/Sustainability Databook.

We have several Group ESG targets that are linked to our Ekuseni Strategy.

â50%* 

reduction in food waste by 2030 

(FY19 baseline) 

Net Zero Carbon

(Scope 1 & 2) by 2050, -60% by 2040 

(2022 baseline)

100% 

CO2 refrigeration by 2040

of general waste diverted from landfill  

75%* 
by 2025

packaging to be recyclable/reusable  

100%* 
by 2025

â20%* 

reduction in water usage per  
company-owned store 2025

(2018 baseline)

*  Boundary for target includes Pick n Pay company-owned stores, excludes Boxer.

Partnering to shift the food system

Number of entrepreneurs enrolled in Enterprise and Supplier Development programme
Percentage of SA seafood sales that meet our sustainable seafood commitment 
(PnP company-owned stores)* 
Percentage private label sow crate friendly pork (PnP company-owned stores)
Spend on B-BBEE businesses in rand billion
*  Sustainable seafood commitments have decreased due to SA sardine stock depletion
Reducing environmental impacts

Total Scope 1 and Scope 2 carbon emissions (million tonnes CO2e)*
Percentage of stores using natural refrigerants (PnP company-owned stores)
Reduction in water usage by 2025 (PnP Company-owned) 
Reduction in food waste by 2030 (against 2019 baseline, PnP company-owned stores)**
100% of PnP branded packaging to be recyclable/reusable by 2025
General waste diverted from landfill by 2025 (PnP owned stores)***
* 
**   Higher levels of food donations in FY21 and FY22 due to Covid-19 relief
***   Increase in waste diversion due to better performance of waste recycling partners since consolidation of services
Supporting communities

Increase in FY23 emissions largely due to increased diesel consumption as a result of load-shedding

Rand million value of ESG investment, inclusive of CSI and SED
Volume of products donated to FoodForward SA (tonnes) 
Number of schools in Pick n Pay and Boxer School Clubs
Number of meals distributed for Feed the Nation (million)*

*   Higher levels of contributions during FY21 and FY22 due to Covid-19 relief
Investing in our people

Total thousand number of employees and contractors*
Percentage of management (top and senior) deemed Historically Disadvantaged  
South African (HDSA)** 
Percentage of employees who are deemed ‘HDSA’
Percentage of employees who are women

*   Reporting in FY22 and FY23 specific to PnP company-owned operations and Boxer – excluding franchises
**  PnP company-owned and Boxer employee data consolidated from FY22

FY23
198

88.5% 
100%
53.4

FY23
1.14
9.5%
12%
27.9%
91.8%
62%

FY23
39.1
882
3 280
5.2

FY23
59.9

78%
99%
64%

FY22
187

91%
100%
50.8

FY22
1.00
6.4%
–
31.9%
88.4%
55%

FY22
37.9
841
3 185
9.1

FY22
57.0

77%
99%
64%

FY21
112

95%
100%
54.5

FY21
0.89
5%
–
37.8%
87.3%
61%

FY21
41.3
840
3 155
27.9

FY21
55.2

–
96%
68%

5

www.pnp.co.zaSupporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleESG/sustainability  databookAppendicesAbout usPartnering to shift  the food systemReducing environmental  impactsESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023D
E
C

O DU

#

L

O

CALLY P R

Building an inclusive supply chain
Promoting local with passion
Our  dedicated  Pick  Local  brand  endorses  goods  and  services  of 
small  South  African  producers,  suppliers  and  service  providers  who 
demonstrate  a  commitment  to  creating  jobs,  are  B-BBEE  compliant, 
and ensure that their raw materials are locally produced, manufactured, 
assembled or packaged. 

Our Pick n Pay Clothing division is constantly innovating to increase 
local products in our stores. With steady growth in the division, the 
localisation  drive  has  enabled  more  than  1  000  jobs  to  be  created 
through the supply chain over the last financial year. 54% of clothing 
is  sourced  from  the  Southern  African  Development  Community 
(SADC) including South Africa (45%) and we aim to increase this level 
to 60% over the next five years. In the years ahead we will continue to 
empower local suppliers to produce locally by building their capacity, 
as well as investigate opportunities in fabric sourcing. This will help 
us grow local production of clothing that has typically been imported, 
such as high winter product lines.

Another  way  we  are  uplifting  the  local  clothing  industry  is  through 
our collaboration with innovative local designers and entrepreneurs 
to  curate  limited  edition  collections  of  on-trend  pieces  at  prices 
accessible for everyone. Unique to our proudly “Made in South Africa” 
range of quality wardrobe essentials, the highly successful initiative 
is now in its fourth year.

Celebrating local innovation and entrepreneurship 

Clothing  Intern  Programme  run  in  partnership  with  respected  South 
African  fashion  designer  Gavin  Rajah,  sees  talented  young  designers  gain 
valuable know-how and practical skills equipping them to be successful in 
a commercial environment and to sustainably expand their own operations. 
Collaborations to date have included Julia Buchanan, Katekani Moreku, Sipho 
Mbuto and Siyethemba Duma who trades under the label Matte Nolim.

South Africa’s difficult economic climate, 

with persistent load-shedding and 

increasing prices of goods and services, 
has presented major challenges to the 

sustainability of many SMMEs

Pick  n  Pay  bakery  small  supplier  of  the  year  winner,  Njabulo  Sithole  from 
KwaZulu-Natal,  has  grown  his  passion  for  home  baking  into  a  successful 
confectionary  business  that  supplies  nearly  200  Pick  n  Pay  stores  and 
employs 40 people.

From humble beginnings in a garage in Durban, Rishav Juglall has grown his 
business, Rocky Brands, into a company with a national footprint, supplying 
stores  with  popular  cleaning  products  and  premium  household  polishes. 
Supported  through  Pick  n  Pay  Clothing’s  ESD  programme,  his  sales  have 
grown by over 400% in the last year and he employs 39 people. 

PARTNERING TO SHIFT THE 
FOOD SYSTEM

South Africa’s food system remains under strain, primarily impacting poorer 
households. By decoupling the Pick n Pay brand into two banners, Pick n Pay and 
Pick n Pay QualiSave, alongside Boxer as the third banner, we can better deliver on 
specific customer ESG interests and needs. In promoting smart, sustainable and 
inclusive food, grocery and clothing supply chains, we support smaller, local suppliers 
to become part of the retail sector, thus contributing to a sustainable South African 
economy. We work with all our suppliers to ensure we provide great quality products 
that are produced responsibly and ethically. Working actively with local suppliers, we 
are expanding our range of healthy and sustainable food choices at affordable prices. 
Our collaborations to reduce food losses at our operations and along production and 
supply chains assist in alleviating hunger through food distribution.

Highlights

60 Boxer stores opened,  
increasing our reach in  

lower-income areas

85% of Pick n Pay own brand  

food and groceries are  

procured locally

Our Enterprise and Supplier Development 

(ESD) programme currently supports 

198 suppliers

65% of our direct clothing  

suppliers employ one or  

more sustainable practices  

in producing goods

R53.4 billion spent with B-BBEE 
businesses during the last financial year 

including 10 new SMME vendors

More than 200 SMMEs make use 
of Pick n Pay’s award-winning finance 

programme, Pick n Pay Fast Pay

Learnings and challenges

Load-shedding, climate and  

geo-political crises causing supply-chain 

Increasing requests for food support 
indicating a worsening of household 

and pricing challenges

food security

Catering for different customer ESG interests and needs
The majority of our customers, in South Africa and across the communities we serve, subsist on limited incomes in difficult economic times. 
With South Africa in the grip of a cost-of-living crisis, our customers need lower prices on essential food and groceries more than ever before. 
Our Ekuseni strategy has better positioned us to deliver on specific customer ESG interests and needs. The Group’s banners are now Pick n Pay, 
Pick n Pay QualiSave and Boxer, respectively targeting from the upper end of the market to the lower. Through our rapidly expanding footprint 
of Boxer stores, we offer lower pricing on essential items to an increasing number of lower-income communities. For the growing middle market, 
around 155 stores have been converted to QualiSave stores, our new banner which also offers essential items at lower prices. Original company-
owned Pick n Pay stores have been repositioned to cater for middle to higher-income shoppers and include a greater range of products with 
sustainability attributes. Affordability for all our customers is further enhanced through our longstanding Smart Shopper loyalty programme.

6

7

www.pnp.co.zaSupporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleESG/sustainability  databookAppendicesAbout usPartnering to shift  the food systemReducing environmental  impactsESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023Through our enterprise and supplier development initiatives we strive to equip, enable and empower local small and emerging businesses to become 
sustainable suppliers to the retail industry. We hand-pick entrepreneurs with innovative product concepts or start-up enterprises to actively grow 
our diverse pool. We provide them with mentorship and business development support. Our ESD programme currently supports 198 suppliers. All 
small businesses have shown great passion and dedication to growing their businesses in a tough economy and have embraced the support offered 
through the programme. Every year we hold the Pick n Pay small supplier awards, celebrating local success stories and entrepreneur role models. 
We highlight two overall winners on page 7.

We have initiatives that help emerging farmers to increase their crop yields and gain entry into the food supply chain. Our Boxer small-scale farmers 
initiative saw 270 emerging farmers completing training in FY23, and 77 are already supplying Boxer stores with fresh produce. 

More than 200 SMMEs make use of Pick n Pay’s award-winning innovative supply chain finance programme, Pick n Pay Fast Pay, which helps 
smaller, emerging suppliers to be sustainably funded by providing early access to payment for goods and products, at competitive sub-prime 
rates. South Africa’s difficult economic climate, with persistent power shortages and increasing prices of goods and services, has presented 
major challenges to the sustainability of many SMMEs. We encourage small businesses to operate as part of Pick n Pay own brand. 

We are reviewing our Enterprise and Supplier Development (ESD) approach with the aim of optimising our response to small suppliers’ concerns 
and challenges. We have appointed a dedicated Pick n Pay SMME buyer from 1 April 2023. Our ESD programme is a dedicated programme that 
helps support and scale SMMEs so they have a chance to make it not only at Pick n Pay but also in the wider retail landscape. This has been a 
strong part of our “Doing Good is Good Business” journey since 1967. We currently support 939 SMMEs across the Group, and 85% of Pick n Pay 
own brand food and groceries are produced locally.

Supporting ethical and sustainable sourcing

We are committed to ensuring that our own brand products are grown, sourced and produced responsibly and sustainably. This includes 
promoting  healthy  oceans  and  fish  stocks,  animal  welfare,  sustainably  manufactured  clothing,  and  tracking  ingredients  with  high 
environmental and social impacts.

Achieving our sourcing commitments for Pick n Pay company-owned stores

Sow crate friendly pork in all Pick n Pay branded  

products since 2019

100% 

100% 

88.5%

of all seafood sales meet our  

sustainable seafood commitment

83% 

Sustainably sourced palm oil in Pick n Pay  

branded products since 2021

of our direct Pick n Pay Clothing suppliers  

are registered on Supplier Ethical Data Exchange (SEDEX)

Seafood policy

Code of Ethics

Palm oil policy

Ethical Sourcing: Pick n Pay Clothing is committed 
to sourcing 50% of our cotton as more sustainable 
cotton by FY25, which includes recycled cotton, 
organic cotton and Fairtrade cotton. 

22% of our cotton is now sustainably sourced, 
an increase of 11% since 2021

Promoting healthier food choices
Our Live Well brand in Pick n Pay aims to meet the growing demand for 
healthier and more sustainable food and household products. We have 
rapidly diversified and grown our product range over the past two years.  
Sub-brands include Live Plant Based, Live Gluten Free and Lactose 
Free,  Live  Green,  Snack  Well  and  Free  Range,  catering  to  various 
dietary needs and preferences. We now offer 390 Live Well products, 
ranging  across  fresh 
items  and  frozen  options.  
We launched 65 new products during the year and sales growth have 
doubled from last year.

items,  pantry 

A plant-based diet is clinically proven to benefit overall body health 
and  significant  evidence  supports  its  value  in  preventing  chronic 
diseases.  There  has  been  increased  innovation  and  growth  in  our 
plant-based  category  as  we  work  with  numerous  local  suppliers  to 
introduce fresh and exciting products. We stock more than 350 plant-
based and vegan-friendly products in our stores.

Over  the  past  five  years  we  have  reformulated  many  products  to 
reduce calories, fat, salt and sugar, and increase fruit, vegetable and 
fibre  content  as  well  as  key  vitamins  and  minerals.  In  total,  we’ve 
removed over 1 000 tonnes of salt and 2 500 tonnes of sugar, and 
reduced sugar in many products by a third. Other products are free 
from gluten, wheat, dairy and lactose. 

We have steadily increased our healthier snacking lines and options 
developed specifically for children, with a focus on minimising salt and 
sugar content and using only natural colourants.

We  run  promotions  that  make  healthier  foods  more  affordable  and 
keep low prices on fresh produce.

On the Green Side creates delicious plant protein products that are inspired 
by chicken and easy to prepare.

Ensuring ethical supply chains
Our  sourcing  Policies  provides  clear  guidance  on  employment 
practices and the social and environmental standards we expect to 
be upheld in the process of supplying Pick n Pay and Boxer branded 
products. All our business partners are required to comply with Pick 
n Pay and Boxer’s Code of Ethics and are expected to ensure that all 
their subcontractors and secondary suppliers comply with this Code. 
Pick n Pay Clothing is a member of leading ethical trade membership 
organisation  SEDEX,  and  of  Sustainability  Initiative  of  South  Africa 
(SIZA). Most of our supply base follow audit protocols which report 
against these initiatives. Traceability of our food is controlled through 
our food health and safety audits.

We  will  soon  be  implementing  a  social  and  ethics  online  self-
assessment for all our branded and private labels suppliers. Suppliers 
with potential risks flagged will be audited by a third party and where 
necessary, corrective actions will be agreed upon and monitored. 

Expanding our range of products with sustainable 
attributes
Spearheading  our  exploration  of  sustainable  product  innovation,  
the  Pick  n  Pay  Live  Well  brand  offers  ranges  for  consumers  who  
seek  products  with  explicitly  sustainable  attributes,  in  particular 
plant-based animal product alternatives, and eco-friendly products.

This year we re-launched the Live Green brand, our rejuvenated range 
of  eco-friendly  cleaning  products.  These  products  are  certified  as 
vegan,  cruelty-free  and  are  not  tested  on  animals.  All  products  are 
made  with  biodegradable,  naturally  derived  active  ingredients*  and 
packaging is 100% recyclable. A first for SA retail, Live Green includes 
a locally produced probiotic range which uses beneficial bacteria to 
keep  surfaces  cleaner  and  healthier  for  longer.  All  our  house  labels 
are now accredited by Beauty Without Cruelty (SA) as animal cruelty-
free. These include sunblock, kids’ ranges, and enzymatic cleaners. 

Pick  n  Pay’s  Clothing  team  works  closely  with  local  suppliers  to 
increase  the  level  of  sustainability  practices  used  in  the  sourcing 
and  production  of  our  own  brand  range.  We  have  projects  centred 
on  increasing  the  sourcing  of  sustainable  cotton,  reducing  water 
usage during clothing manufacture and increasing levels of recycled 
content. In FY23, sustainable practices were used in the manufacture 
of  38%  of  our  collections.  These  practices 
include  rainwater 
harvesting,  recycling  of  pre-production  waste,  water  recycling  and 
using  solar  energy.  65%  of  our  direct  Pick  n  Pay  clothing  suppliers 
employ one or more of these practices. Through the Better Cotton 
Initiative,  we  are  growing  the  ranges  that  use  organic  cotton  that 
is sustainably sourced. Our progress has been impacted by climate 
and  geopolitical  issues  causing  spikes  in  cotton  prices.  In  our 
Pick  n  Pay  Clothing  stores,  all  paper  used,  and  cardboard  used  for 
footwear  hangers,  is  Forest  Stewardship  Council  (FSC)  approved.  
All our plastic hangers are made from 100% recycled materials and  
we aim to source biodegradable hangers.

88% of cardboard and paper used for our own brands and packaging 
is FSC-certified and we are committed to reaching 100% by 2025.

Pick  n  Pay  has  been  one  of  the  most  influential  retailers  driving 
sustainable seafood in South Africa. In working toward our sustainable 
seafood commitments, 79% of our seafood products by species and 
88.5% of our products by sales comply with our commitments. We 
strive to improve on these figures with our ongoing partnership with 
the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) (see page 25).

*  Except for the furniture polish

8

9

www.pnp.co.zaSupporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleESG/sustainability  databookAppendicesAbout usPartnering to shift  the food systemReducing environmental  impactsESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023About us

Partnering to shift  
the food system

Reducing environmental  

impacts

Crafted Collection granola produced by one of our partner SMMEs, Simply 
Granola.

By providing clear nutritional labelling on our own brand products, we  
help our customers make better choices for themselves and the planet. 
We  distribute  nutrition  education  posters  and  curriculum-aligned 
worksheets  to  3  280  schools  in  rural  and  urban  areas  throughout 
South Africa through the Pick n Pay and Boxer School Club platform. 
Health tips on School Club social media are shared weekly.

In  committing  to  providing  customers  with  quality  products  that 
meet  the  highest  health  and  safety  requirements,  we  maintain 
stringent standards across our supply chain. We work with suppliers 
to ensure that they meet both regulatory and our own high standards 
and help them improve the quality of their products and internal food 
safety processes. We have an in-house team of food technologists 
to  ensure  our  own  brand  products  comply  with  all  the  relevant 
legislation  in  terms  of  quality,  content  standards  and  labelling.  All 
food  suppliers  are  audited  by  a  third  party  and  all  stores  undergo 
stringent food safety audits.

Health and safety

Reducing food waste

Our food waste reduction commitments:

 • Reduce food waste by 50% by 2030 

(FY19 baseline) (*27.9%)

 • Work with 20 of our largest suppliers to reduce 

food waste in our shared value chain by 50%  
by 2030

 • We donated 882 tonnes of food to FoodForward 

SA, valued at more than R39 million
Key: *% progress

Food  waste  is  one  of  the  most  critical  social,  economic  and 
environmental issues facing our planet. Our fight against food waste 
in South Africa calls for action on farms and in manufacturing, in-
store and at home, and through food redistribution to people in need.

We  quantify  our  food  waste  data  in  line  with  the  World  Resources 
Institute  (WRI)  Food  Waste  and  Loss  Protocol.  This  enables  us  to 
identify  “hotspots”  and  take  action,  working  in  partnership  with 
others to reduce food waste and increase food surplus redistribution 
in a targeted way. We have reduced the volume of food waste in our 
operations by 27.9% over the past four years.

This year, 62% of food waste in our operations was diverted from landfill 
through donations and preventing surplus food from going to waste. 
A regrettable 5.9% increase in our food waste volumes compared to 
the previous year is largely attributed to persistent electricity outages, 
causing  disruptions  along  the  supply  chain  and  reducing  customer 
demand  amid  concerns  that  fresh  and  frozen  food  may  spoil  due  to 
interruptions to power at home.

Pick n Pay had set an initial internal target to reduce food waste by 
50% by 2025. However, this target was adjusted from 2025 to 2030 
due to the impacts of Covid-19 and load-shedding and to align with 
the 10x20x30 target. This year we have changed our reporting metric 
to refer to tonnes of waste and not number of products. We believe 
this  is  a  more  transparent  and  accurate  way  of  reporting  on  food 
waste.  It  also  aligns  with  the  Food  Loss  and  Waste  agreement  and 
WRI through 10x20x30.

We  are  active  participants  in  local  and  international  initiatives  that 
align  with  the  United  Nations  Sustainable  Development  Goals  12.3 
target to reduce global food loss and waste by 50% by 2030. This 
includes  working  with  19  of  our  biggest  suppliers  as  part  of  the 
international 10x20x30 Food Waste Initiative to help them determine 
and  demonstrate  their  progress.  Progress  in  some  areas  has  been 
challenged  during  the  energy  crisis.  The  vision  of  the  10x20x30 
Initiative is to massively increase private sector contribution to the 
global  goal  of  reducing  food  loss  and  waste  by  50%  by  2030  by 
catalysing efforts “up” the supply chain. 

Our  partnership  with  FoodForward  SA  has  increased  its  reach  to 
more stores and is steadily including excess food in our supply chain.  
We  contributed  882  tonnes  of  edible  surplus  food  to  the  value  of  
R39  million  from  our  stores  to  FoodForward  SA  for  distribution  to  
2  750  beneficiary  organisations.  These  organisations  collectively 
provide daily meals to more than 985 000 people every year.

At  an  operational  level,  we  strive  to  eliminate  unsold  food  going  
to  waste  by  continually  optimising  our  forecasting,  ordering,  shelf- 
life  extension  projects,  and 
implementing  “reduced  to  clear” 
processes to reduce food surplus at the end of each day. We have 
reinforced training at stores on cold storage protocols and minimising 
food waste.

Collaborating for a nature positive food system
Looking ahead, the Group is working with WWF to establish a broad-
based, multi-year transformational partnership that will transform the 
Group business operations and value chains to be more sustainable 
and  resilient  while  reducing  their  environmental  impact  and  driving 
resource  stewardship.  The  long-term  goals  include  leveraging  the 
Group  and  WWF’s  respective  capabilities  and  capacities  to  reduce 
negative environmental impacts through production and consumption, 
supporting environmental impact reduction in the agricultural supply 
chain,  and  decreasing  food  loss/waste  for  selected  products  and 
commodities.

Read more on page 25.

REDUCING ENVIRONMENTAL 
IMPACTS

As a retailer with thousands of suppliers and millions of customers, we are mindful 
of our wide reach and the environmental impact we have across our value chain. 
While the Group has limited opportunity to address national energy and climate 
challenge at scale, our commitment to reducing environmental impacts continues 
to open opportunities for electricity conservation at stores and distribution centres; 
explore options for renewable energy; and improve the efficiency of our distribution 
operations. We are also working on a broad set of solutions and targets to reduce our 
impact in other key areas, in particular refrigerants, water, waste and packaging, 
working with our suppliers and partners to innovate for a healthy planet and  
helping our customers play their part in protecting the environment.

Highlights

11 421 tonnes
waste recycled in  
company-owned operations

Installed 22 natural  
refrigerant systems  

9.5% of the company-owned stores 
now use a form of natural refrigerant

Reduced average packaging weight 
for Pick n Pay own brand products by 
27.5% against our 2019 baseline

Learnings/challenges

Persistent electricity outages 

necessitated incremental R430 million 
net of electricity saving spend on diesel 

generations for stores

Expanding renewable energy usage at 
stores in malls and distribution centers 
is dependent on landlords installing solar 

Establishing accurate packaging data 

across parts of the supply chain is 

complex and challenging

solutions

Climate and energy policy

Water stewardship policy

Waste management policy

Sustainable packaging policy

10

11

www.pnp.co.zaSupporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleESG/sustainability  databookAppendicesESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023About us

Partnering to shift  
the food system

Reducing environmental  

impacts

Reducing our carbon footprint
In 2022 we formally set a Group carbon commitment to be net zero 
carbon  (Scope  1  and  2)  by  2050,  with  key  climate  change-related 
targets  across  the  Group.  These  targets  focus  on  areas  where  our 
teams have the most control. 

Accounting  and  minimising  for  our  direct  climate  change  impacts 
is  the  focus  of  our  climate  commitments.  This  year  we  published  a 
climate  change  and  energy  policy  which  outlines  our  approach  and 
commitments.  Our  climate-related  key  performance 
indicators 
include  emission  reduction  targets,  renewable  energy  targets  and 
energy efficiency targets, and natural refrigeration targets.

Energy efficiency is tracked using extensive metering that enables us 
to measure real-time consumption. We are working towards a target 
of 45% improvement in energy efficiency for Pick n Pay company-
owned by 2030 against a FY10 baseline. The roll-out of eco-friendly 
LED lighting to stores continues, including back of house and trading 
floors. Over 95% of Boxer stores use LED lighting systems, including 
store refrigeration.

The  rapid  escalation  in  our  online  shopping  deliveries  requires 
increasing levels of transportation, predominantly using motorcycles. 
To  reduce  transport  emissions,  we  are  partnering  with  on-demand 
logistics company Picup and our partner Takealot, in trialling the use 
of electronic motorcycles.

 • Group commitment to be net zero carbon by 

2050 (FY22 baseline) and -60% by 2040 [*14%]. 
50,535 tCO2e increase in FY23 Scope 1 emissions 
compared to FY22 (due to increase in generator 
diesel consumption as a result of load-shedding)

 • 60% renewable energy use across the Group  

by 2040

 • Conversion to 100% natural refrigeration in Pick 

n Pay company-owned and Boxer stores by 2040 
[*9.5%]

 • 45% improvement in energy efficiency across  

Pick n Pay company-owned stores by 2030  
(FY10 Baseline)
Key: *% progress

Energy resilience
Energy  resilience  has  become  a  critical  issue  for  our  business.  The 
severe  escalation  in  electricity  outages  in  South  Africa  throughout 
the last year, has had a significant impact on our operations. We have 
been running diesel generators to mitigate the impact of disruptions, 
resulting  in  a  concerning  50,535  tCO2e  increase  in  FY23  Scope  1 
emissions  compared  to  FY22  (due  to  increase  in  generator  diesel 
consumption).

To  tackle  this  challenge,  the  Group  is  implementing  an  energy 
resilience plan, to reduce our reliance on the national grid as far as 
possible.  This  plan  includes  engaging  with  landlords  with  the  aim 
of  maximising  the  installation  of  solar  solutions  on  store  roofs  to 
generate  solar  power  or  using  a  “fair  share”  of  renewable  energy 
that  the  landlords  themselves  generate.  We  are  exploring  more 
sustainable options than using diesel generators for backup power.  
We are currently trialling the installation of inverter and battery power 
solutions  at  selected  company-owned  stores.  About  80%  of  our 
stand-alone corporate Pick n Pay Clothing stores have been fitted 
with  inverter  and  battery  power  backup  which  ensure  sustainable 
operation through load-shedding. 

The  energy  crisis  is  accelerating  our  plans  to  expand  energy 
solutions at our stores (owned and leased) and distribution centres.  We 
have  developed  metrics  and  pathways  for  increasing  our  reliance 
on  renewables.  By  2040,  we  aim  to  meet  60%  of  all  energy  use 
requirements from renewable energy. 

low  carbon  transition  plan 

Reducing our impacts
Our 
includes  a  focus  on  reducing 
refrigeration emissions. Our conversion to a climate-friendly natural 
refrigerants programme is gaining momentum and we have committed 
R3 billion towards achieving a target of having natural refrigeration 
systems  in  135  Pick  n  Pay  company-owned  stores  and  166  Boxer 
stores by FY28. In FY23 we converted 22 company-owned stores, 
bringing the total to 56. All our distribution centres are running natural 
refrigeration systems.

Innovating for more sustainable buildings
Our  recently  launched  Eastport  distribution  centre  in  Gauteng,  the 
Pick n Pay distribution centre in Cape Town, and 65 Pick n Pay Clothing 
stores all hold a 4 star Green Star rating, highlighting our dedication to 
sustainable practices. 

All our new Pick n Pay Clothing stores are designed with a strong focus 
on  sustainability  features.  In  addition  to  using  solar  inverter-lithium 
battery power solutions and more sustainable technology such as eco-
friendly lighting and energy-efficient printers and till points, the stores 
have a strong reduce and re-use ethos. Most of the fixtures are made 
from recycled materials, including hangers, mannequins, wooden tables 
and aluminium entrance doors, and we use second hand shelves and 
railings. The new stores also feature “plant walls” which act as natural 
air filters. For every new store opened, we plant 100 trees at Platbos 
Nature Reserve. To date, more than 5 000 trees have been planted.

Our  recently  launched  Eastport  distribution  centre  incorporates 
various  environmentally  friendly  initiatives,  qualifying  it  for  a  green 
building  certification.  Solar  panels  generate  solar  power  to  meet 
operational  requirements  and  rainwater  harvesting  is  expected  to 
save 90 million litres of municipal water consumption each year. The 
buildings are designed to maximise daylight harvesting and have LED 
lights  that  automatically  adjust  their  brightness  levels  according  to 
the level of natural daylight. Waste management onsite is outsourced 
to a company committed to sustainable practices.

Conserving freshwater

 • Reduce water intensity by 20% by 2025 (FY18 
baseline) for Pick n Pay company-owned stores

12% to date

The Group’s water consumption is primarily at stores for sanitation, 
cleaning,  cooking  and  baking.  The  Group  relies  predominantly  on 
municipal  supplies.  We  continually  monitor  and  manage  our  water 
usage,  with  a  focus  on  identifying  and  addressing  leaks.  We  have 
water  efficiency  measures  rolled  out  and  online  water  metering 
with  real-time  alerts  installed  at  most  of  our  Pick  n  Pay  company-
owned  stores,  distribution  centres  and  offices.  Metering  is  being 
progressively rolled out at Boxer stores. This enables us to timeously 
pick up and address leaks and take corrective actions. 

Our  water  stewardship  policy  guides  our  approach  to  reducing  our 
water  usage  and  working  collectively  with  our  stakeholders  to 
safeguard  this  valuable  resource  and  mitigate  the  risks  associated 
with water scarcity. 

Reducing and repurposing waste

 • Divert 75% of general waste produced at our 

Pick n Pay company-owned operations from landfill 
by 2025 through recycling and recoveries 

62% progress

In  supporting  the  principles  of  a  circular  economy,  our  progress  is 
underpinned  by  promoting  the  “avoid,  reduce,  re-use  and  recycle’” 
waste management hierarchy. Our efforts are guided by our waste 
management policy. A waste management dashboard introduced in 
2021 helps us track our progress towards targets, including improving 
levels of recycling, increasing waste resource donations and reducing 
waste to landfills.

We raise awareness with our employees on how to reduce waste in 
stores and have systems in place to collect recyclable material. We 
continue to expand recycling facilities at our stores where customers 
can deposit plastic bags and plastic containers, compact fluorescent 
lamps  (CFLs),  batteries  and  ink  cartridges.  Pick  n  Pay  company-
owned stores generated 26 025 tonnes of general waste in FY23 and 
recycled 43.9%.

Our  commitment  to  recycling  extends  to  increasing  the  use  of 
recycled materials in clothing products and store refurbishments. 

We also partner with suppliers and customers to innovate and create 
a healthier planet free from unnecessary waste. In repurposing waste, 
our  award-winning  trolleys  in  stores  are  made  from  high  density 
polyethylene  (PEHD)  and  consist  of  50%  post-consumer  recycled 
material. To date we have introduced a recycling vending machine in 
7 stores. These units reward customers for recycling any recyclable 
waste product with a relevant barcode. 

Finding solutions to the packaging 
challenge

Our ambitious packaging commitments by 2025 
against FY20 baseline:
 •

100% of Pick n Pay packaging will be re-usable or 
recyclable [*92%]

 • 30% average recycled content across all Pick n Pay 

packaging [*31% – target met]

 • 30% reduction in average packaging weight of  

 •

Pick n Pay branded products [*28%]
100% of cardboard and paper used for Pick n Pay 
packaging is sourced from responsibly managed 
forests by 2025 [*88%]
Key: *% progress

Packaging plays an important role in protecting products and reducing 
food waste. However, packaging waste, particularly plastic, can be a 
significant  environmental  problem  when  not  re-used  or  recycled. 
That’s why we aim to treat packaging as a valuable resource that can 
be used, re-used, collected and recycled in a closed loop, supporting 
the principles of a circular economy.

Pick  n  Pay  assumes  a  leadership  role  in  local  and  international 
collaborative  efforts  to  work  towards  common  long-term  targets 
for  the  plastics  value  chain.  We  have  a  robust  packaging  database 
and  reporting  process  which  has  helped  us  significantly  improve 
the accuracy of our packaging data. In turn, we can better track our 
performance  against  Pick  n  Pay’s  packaging  targets  and  identify 
areas  where  packaging  can  be  improved.  Where  we  can’t  remove 
packaging,  we  aim  to  reduce  it  to  an  absolute  minimum.  When  we 
reduce packaging, we reduce it with recyclability in mind, with a focus 
on  increasing  the  content  of  specially  treated,  factory  and  post-
consumer waste material.

We  have  made  good  progress  towards  our  packaging  targets 
and  we’re  on  track  to  achieving  the  ambitious  goals  set  out  by  the  
South  African  Plastics  Pact,  of  which  we  are  a  founding  member, 
by  2025.  Our  targets  include  ensuring  that  100%  of  our  private 
label  packaging  is  re-usable  or  recyclable.  This  number  has  shifted 
from  67%  to  92%  in  the  past  two  years  through  various  changes. 
Over the  past five  years,  more than 10  000 tonnes of  plastic  have  
been  removed  from  the  environment  to  make  Pick  n  Pay’s  100% 
recyclable blue plastic bags. Over 11 million plastic bottles have been 
recycled to manufacture our re-usable shopping bags since 2018.

In  our  journey  to  reduce  problematic  single-use  plastic  packaging, 
we’ve  removed  all  plastic  barrier  bags  from  our  till  points.  This  will 
prevent  over  20  million  of  these  small  bags,  which  are  difficult  to 
recycle, from ending up in the environment. We continue to provide 
barrier bags in our fruit and vegetable section for loose produce.

Sometimes we are faced with trade-offs. For example, our customers 
favoured the introduction of brown paper bags for on-demand (asap!) 
deliveries.  However,  these  bags  have  no  handles,  break  easily,  and 
can get wet when carrying frozen goods, limiting their re-usability. We 
are trialling a more sustainable bag made from recycled plastic that is 
thicker and bigger, with a seal to promote re-use. At scale, this would 
have a similar environmental footprint to the high volumes of brown 
bags currently being recycled or going to landfill.

Many of our packaging improvement and reduction achievements are 
basic but make a massive difference. For instance, we have changed 
all our milk bottle caps and snack yoghurt caps to white, improving 
efficiencies and making recycling easier with one colour cap. 

We  support  and  adhere  to  the  Extended  Producer  Responsibility 
(EPR) for packaging regulation as a key policy instrument to address 
the  increasing  volumes  of  plastic  pollution.  We  belong  to  relevant 
Producer  Responsibility  Organisations  (PROs)  and  submit  our  data 
quarterly.

12

13

www.pnp.co.zaSupporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleESG/sustainability  databookAppendicesESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023Supporting  
communities

Investing in  
our people

ESG/sustainability  

databook

Appendices

SUPPORTING COMMUNITIES

Our ESG contribution

Total Rand Value of CSI Spend – FY23 (million)

Our social investment strategy focuses on empowering communities through 
educational initiatives and reducing food insecurity. Access to quality education  
is a globally recognised means of lifting people out of poverty. Household food 
insecurity is a significant problem in South Africa, with many people living in poverty 
and struggling to access enough food to meet their basic needs. We also respond to 
immediate needs in the more vulnerable communities we serve. We believe that  
doing good is good business. Customers reward businesses which they believe are  
at the heart of society and give back to the communities they serve. As customers 
reward us with their loyalty, we can grow, serve more customers, generate more  
jobs and help build resilience in more communities.

11.6

3.3
3.5

11.1

Total
39.1

Distributing excess food
Our partnerships to redistribute food reduce our levels of food waste 
and support thousands of families to be more secure and contribute 
to a stable socio-economic environment. Pick n Pay is FoodForward 
SA’s largest retail partner. During FY23, we contributed 882 tonnes 
of  edible  surplus  food  to  the  value  of  R35  million  from  our  stores 
to FoodForward SA for distribution to more than 2 750 beneficiary 
organisations. These organisations collectively provide daily meals to 
more than 985 000 people every year.
Feed the Nation food drive

Pick  n  Pay  has  continued  to  support  vulnerable  communities 
through  the  Feed  the  Nation  Foundation’s  sustained  national 
food drive over the last three years, with ongoing support from 
staff and customers. We continue to provide hampers to support 
child-headed households within our School Club programme.

Highlights

More than 42 million meals 
provided since inception to vulnerable 
people in partnership with the Feed the 

Nation Foundation.  

More than 5 million meals in FY23

Over 2.4 million learners at  
3 280 schools supported through  
Pick n Pay and Boxer’s School Club

Learnings/challenges

Rising cost-of-living and food inflation 

exacerbating the hunger crisis

882 tonnes of edible surplus 

food from our Pick n Pay company-owned 
stores contributed to FoodForward SA’s 

hunger relief efforts

6 646 active community  
food gardens and 2 102 home  

gardens supported by the  

Ackerman Pick n Pay Foundation

R11.6 million  

worth of clothing donated  

to Clothing Bank

R39.1 million 

spend on CSI

Recycling efforts  

in communities are limited by  
a lack of recycling collectors

Lack of internet connectivity at  
schools limits access to online 

educational resources

Valuable insights gained through our School Club social impact  

assessments that measured progress toward SDGs

9.6
• Basic Needs & Social Development, including Nutrition and/or 
    Feeding Programmes   
• Education
• Environmental Management Projects   
• Skills Development, including Adult Basic Education & Training (ABET)
• Small Business Development Projects

Targeting hunger

According  to  an  Ipsos  market  research  study  conducted  in  2021, 
more than 40% of South Africans of all age groups are affected by 
hunger. Food insecurity has wide-ranging socio-economic impacts 
such as stunting (which impacts on education) and social stability. 
While our primary contribution towards alleviating hunger in South 
Africa  is  by  keeping  the  price  of  essential  items  more  affordable. 
We also help by empowering people to grow their food, supporting 
income-generating  rural  and  urban  food  gardens,  fostering  small 
energy farmers via the Boxer small-scale farmer initiative, donating 
excess  food  from  our  stores,  and  support  the  Feed  the  Nation 
Foundation’s hunger relief efforts.

Food gardens
The Ackerman Pick n Pay Foundation (APF), who works closely with 
the Group, partners with organisations nationally to establish rural 
and urban community food gardens, with a strong training element 
that  encourages  replication  at  home.  The  numbers  continue  to 
grow,  with  an  encouraging  positive  shift  in  garden  produce  selling 
behaviour and an increase in households growing their own produce 
as a solution to alleviating hunger. 

After  three  years,  there  are  now  6  646  active  community  food 
gardens and more than 2 100 home gardens. In FY23 these were a 
source of food for 30 340 families and boosted about 260 000 meals 
at  Early  Childhood  Development  (ECD)  centres  and  schools.  The 
average monthly income from highest-impact gardens is R20 000.

The  Pick  n  Pay  School  Club  partnered  to  implement  food  gardens 
at 10 schools during FY23 and will partner with Feed the Nation to 
establish a further 10 community and school gardens during FY24.

The  APF  invests  in  projects  focusing  on  food  security  initiatives. 
In FY23 we supported 14 larger projects and 10 small projects that 
included assisting food gardens with clearing surrounding areas and 
improving their land management or water supply.

R178 million 

in food distributed since 1 April 2020

42.2 million 
meals distributed to date

226 863 hampers 

distributed to date

1.5 million 

meals collected in Mandela Day campaign,  

in partnership with FoodForward SA

Ackerman Pick n Pay Foundation Community Garden in partnership with the 
Group and the Siyazisiza Trust in KZN

14

www.pnp.co.za

15

ESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023About usPartnering to shift  the food systemReducing environmental  impactsThe Boxer small-scale farming initiative 

Supporting township youth cycle academy 

Waste to resource: building garden beds with 
ecobricks 

Team  Boxer, 
led  by  Ntombi  Dludla,  Boxer  Executive  for  Stakeholder 
Engagement  and  Sustainability  (center),  stands  outside  Emfundisweni 
Mission  grounds.  This  location  is  one  of  the  areas  where  Boxer  and  W&R 
Seta selected over 300 farmers, who live and work on their farms in small 
rural towns in the Eastern Cape, to participate in a campaign. The aim of this 
campaign is not only to enhance their skills through education but also to 
enable them to supply their produce to Boxer stores.
Targeting education
Now in its 20th year, Pick n Pay and Boxer School Club is the largest brand-funded educational resource programme in South Africa, reaching over  
114 800 teachers, 2.4 million learners and 3.6 million guardians in 3 280 private, urban, suburban and rural schools across South Africa. The 
footprint continues to grow as we open new stores, notably Boxer stores, and identify local schools to register.

Pick n Pay is a longstanding sponsor of the Velokhaya Life Cycling Academy 
in  Khayelitsha,  Cape  Town.  Velokhaya  uses  cycling-based  programmes  to 
involve township youth in a positive after-school activity, promoting life skills 
and  opportunities,  free  of  charge.  The  academy  has  over  200  registered 
youths between the ages of 7 and 25 years and is actively promoting the 
participation of young women.

Pick n Pay and Boxer School Clubs deliver much-needed educational support that is curriculum compliant (CAPS). The free educational material 
supplied is co-created with partners and updated annually. The platform includes free access to digital content through its website to its schools. 
In FY24 we will launch an updated website, with the latest curriculum content for Grade 1 to 12, available at no cost for any school to download. A 
popular ongoing initiative is our Hero Awards programme in primary schools, which recognises learners for their positive societal impact.

Pick n Pay partners with Mellon Educate to build and support classroom infrastructure. Since 2018 we have assisted four schools. 

Pick n Pay and Boxer School Club expands its reach and impact through social media platforms, which provide a powerful educational channel for 
health and environmental-related issues. We have more than 76 000 followers and aim to have 100 000 followers by FY25. The initiative continues  
to diversify its contribution to learning and eco-awareness (see below). We respond to specific needs at different schools. 

In FY22 we conducted a baseline assessment of our Pick n Pay and Boxer School Club’s impact against international standards, which provided 
valuable insights into how we can improve our service and delivery to schools and communities, and our contribution to the SDGs. In FY23 we 
repeated the three-month study, conducting assessments mainly with teachers and parents, at 40 schools from served regions. 

Each  year  we  fund  more  than  1  000  bursaries  for  learners  including  those  from  School  Club  schools,  promoting  skills  development  in  our 
communities and a potential pipeline of talent for the Group.

In  FY23  we  will  relaunch  a  campaign  delivered  in  partnership  with  the  South  African  Depression  and  Anxiety  Group  aimed  at  empowering 
educators to teach learners about the dangers of underage drinking as well as assess and assist in cases of alcohol abuse.

Fostering environmental stewardship
We raise awareness of simple ways people can help to reduce their 
environmental impacts. Through Pick n Pay and Boxer School Club, 
we  engage  learners  in  enterprising  socio-environmental  initiatives. 
Our  innovative  partnership  with  Clover  Danone,  now  in  its  fourth 
year, highlights an understanding of the value of responsible plastic 
recycling.  This  year  we  collected  over  300  000  yoghurt  tubs  from 
Pick n Pay School Club members at 80 primary schools around the 
country. The tubs were upcycled into lightweight envirocrete bricks 
that  are  being  used  to  build  a  library  at  Nageng  Primary  School 
in  Vosloorus.  We  also  distributed  more  than  30  000  pencil  bags 
made from recycled plastic bottles to learners at over 190 schools 
nationwide, teaching the value of recycling.

Over the past three years, in collaboration with the South African PET 
plastic  recycling  company,  educational  content  focusing  on  plastic 
recycling has been created and provided to 500 schools each year. 
In  partnership  with  Polyco,  85  schools  received  recycle  bins  made 
from recycled materials as well as educational materials on recycling. 
Our diverse efforts to promote a recycling culture in communities are 
however challenged by a lack of recycling collectors in most of the 
schools’ areas.

Pick  n  Pay  School  Club  members  regularly  participate  in  Pick  n 
Pay-organised  community  clean-ups  aimed  at  engaging  our  youth 
in  making  a  positive  impact  on  the  environment.  Since  2019,  in 
partnership  with  14  environmental  organisations,  we  have  held 
46 beach, river and township clean-ups in four provinces. We have 
involved 3 366 volunteers across 16 schools and collected 7 850 kg 
of waste.

During the year, Boxer employed 100 unemployed youth to clean up 
the streets around 25 participating stores nationally. 

Pick n Pay School Club collaborated with Tata Consultancy Services 
on its first Sustainathon competition in South Africa, which provided 
an  opportunity  to  recognise  learners  for  their  innovative  ideas  to 
reduce surplus food from becoming waste. 

In  our  stores,  we  encourage  our  customers  to  bring  their  own  
re-usable containers when shopping.

Using our products for good
We  repurpose  clothing  returns  and  damaged  items  to  support 
various positive initiatives. Pick n Pay Clothing donates damaged and 
returned items to the Clothing Bank. In FY23 we donated clothing to 
the retail value of R11.6 million. The Clothing Bank has more than 700 
active businesswomen, who sell clothing to sustain their livelihoods. 
We  relaundered  and  donated  clothing  stock  damaged  during  floods 
in KwaZulu-Natal to the cost value of R8.2 million to the LIV Village 
organisation  caring  for  orphaned  and  vulnerable  children.  To  raise 
funds  for  our  Feed  the  Nation  campaign,  we  developed  a  special 
range  of  baby  bibs,  with  a  percentage  of  each  sale  being  donated, 
amounting to R87 000.

Pick  n  Pay  has  collaborated  with  the  Sunflower  Fund  for  20  years. 
In  FY23  we  sold  105  000  “tope”  bandanas  during  the  Sunflower 
Day campaign, raising R1 million towards fighting blood diseases like 
leukaemia.

In  support  of  Breast  Cancer  Awareness  month,  Pick  n  Pay  raised 
R600 000 for breast cancer support group Reach for Recovery, by 
donating  R1  from  every  pink  punnet  of  mushrooms  we  sold  during 
October, towards breast prostheses for cancer survivors who can’t 
afford them.

The  designs  of  our  re-usable  shopping  bags  create  awareness  and 
funding for local non-profit organisations as proceeds from these bag 
sales go to selected charities.

Eco-Bricks Food Garden at False Bay College

Pick n Pay, in partnership with Waste-ED, has developed food gardens at two 
schools using eco-bricks donated by customers. These plastic bottles are 
densely  packed  with  non-recyclables  like  used  plastic  to  create  re-usable 
building  blocks.  The  project  not  only  teaches  learners  and  the  community 
about building with eco-bricks, but also includes waste education, support 
and training in gardening.

16

17

About usPartnering to shift  the food systemReducing environmental  impactsSupporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleESG/sustainability  databookAppendiceswww.pnp.co.zaESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023INVESTING IN OUR PEOPLE

Our people are at the heart of what we do. In striving to be an employer of choice, 
our commitment to employees is that we provide good jobs, effective training and 
development initiatives, competitive pay, good working conditions and an opportunity  
to progress. Creating a caring and more inclusive and diverse workplace provides  
a critical foundation for promoting our desired organisational culture and achieving 
our Ekuseni objectives. 

Highlights

More than 4 000 new jobs created, 
largely through growth in Boxer and 

Clothing stores and online delivery services 

R8.3 billion  
total employee costs

R102.1 million in training  
and education; 97% of training  

spend directed to previously 
disadvantaged employees

Providing employees with flexibility to 

access and complete courses that deliver 

relevant skills on demand

R3.3 million 

in bursaries

More than doubled our offering  

of e-learning courses;  
92 353 e-learning

lessons completed compared

to 39 426 in FY22

Challenges

Load-shedding has caused disruption and 

challenges for all our employees

Rising operational costs require  
an organisational restructuring  
process to realise efficiencies  

and improved productivity

Retaining employees living with  
a disability requires additional  

focus from managers

Code of Ethics

Harassment policy

Human rights policy

Employment equity policy

Job security
South  Africa’s  unemployment  crisis  has  been  exacerbated  by 
retraction in the economy and the ongoing crisis in national electricity 
generation has had a profound impact on every part of society and 
the  economy.  Despite  the  depressed  local  environment,  the  Group 
was able to secure jobs in FY23. By increasing our footprint, including 
58  new  Clothing  stores  and  60  new  Boxer  stores,  we  created 
more  than  4  000  new  jobs.  Going  forward,  we  expect  to  increase 
employment opportunities through ongoing expansion in these areas 
of the business.

The Group delivered a robust performance in FY23 in a very challenging 
operating environment. The prevailing issue has been the high frequency 
of electricity outages, causing unprecedented disruption in the retail 
sector  and  rising  operational  costs.  The  Group  spent  an  incremental  
R522 million on diesel to run generators (R430 million net of electricity 
savings) to provide uninterrupted service for customers in our stores. 
Given  the  ongoing  challenges  we  face,  we  need  to  ensure  that  we 
create a fit-for-purpose organisational structure to realise efficiencies 
and  improved  productivity.  Pick  n  Pay  company-owned  operations 
commenced with modernising its junior store management structures 
in  March  2023  to  best  support  changing  customer  and  operational 
needs.  The  Group  anticipates  that  some  roles  are  likely  to  be  lost 
through a section 189 retrenchment process. However, the business is 
also creating a broadly equivalent number of new roles at a more junior 
level. This process is underway with good progress to date. 

18

Supporting  
communities

Investing in  
our people

ESG/sustainability  

databook

Appendices

Boxer partners with organisations to support the 
health and wellness of communities 

Health, safety and well-being
We are committed to keeping colleagues safe and helping them live a 
healthier and more sustainable lifestyle so they can be their best at 
work and home. Our approach has always been to raise awareness, 
inspire and motivate colleagues to look after their well-being. 

We  recently  consolidated  our  wellness  interventions  into  one  core 
programme  that  covers  key  areas:  mental,  physical  and  financial  
well-being,  employee  benefits  including  medical  aid  options,  and 
support with navigating the digital space. The roll-out of the initiative 
has  been  supported  through  monthly  campaigns  focusing  on  each 
of the focus areas. Information on our various initiatives, application 
forms  and  assistance,  is  available  through  an  online  platform.  We 
conduct  health  awareness  campaigns  which  assist  in  encouraging 
employees to complete wellness screenings, including blood pressure, 
glucose,  cholesterol,  body  mass  index  and  HIV  tests  during  the 
wellness days, which are held nationally across its business. 

Supporting the mental well-being of our people is a particular focus.  
We  have  a  company-funded  employee  assistance  programme  to 
support  individuals  in  identifying  and  managing  challenges.  Every 
month we have a mental wellness week in which we focus on a specific 
issue. We implement a hybrid working policy at Pick n Pay for office-
based employees to help them optimise their time management. 

All  employees  receive  health  and  safety  training  as  part  of  their 
induction.  Specific  training  is  provided  where  required.  We  have  
a team of occupational health and safety (OHS) practitioners who co-
ordinate  our  health  and  safety  activities  and  provide  health  advice 
and referrals when needed. We conduct monthly internal OHS audits 
to  ensure  compliance  with  the  OHS  Act  and  identify  and  address 
areas for corrective action or improvement. 

We have established an operations centre that focuses on managing 
security-related  risks.  We  strengthened  security  measures  at  our 
12  highest  risk  Pick  n  Pay  company-owned  stores,  including  the 
addition  of  resistant  and  inter-locking  doors.  This  has  significantly 
reduced  security-related  incidents  at  Pick  n  Pay  company-owned 
stores in FY23. Similarly, Boxer has a formal process where high-risk 
Boxer stores are identified and stringent measures are implemented 
to mitigate security-related risks.

Boxer maintains a continuous partnership with organisations dedicated to 
supporting communities in the field of health. Whether it involves upgrading 
paediatric wards or bringing smiles to children’s faces, the commitment to 
assisting and aiding the vulnerable stands as a cornerstone of the Boxer 
Ubuntu Projects. In addition to the restoration of paediatric wards, Boxer 
collaborates  with  the  Smile  Foundation  to  bring  back  smiles  to  children 
throughout South Africa.

Health and safety

Diversity, equity and inclusion
We  are  building  a  diversity-conscious  workforce  and  making  sure  that  all  employees  feel  like  they  belong.  The  Group’s  Code  of  Ethics  and 
Values set out the behaviours we expect of all our colleagues and is supported by various anti-discrimination policies. We have a zero-tolerance 
approach to bullying, harassment, gender-based violence (GBV) and victimisation. We rolled out a Group-wide campaign to raise awareness and 
understanding among all employees about harassment and the Group’s updated harassment policy through a combination of in-person, video 
and online training sessions. 

IT'S JUST
NOT THE 

PICK n PAY WAY
We care for and respect each other

REPORT IT.

END IT.

Free anonymous

Ethics and Values Line
0800 772 759

#ITSNEVEROK  #ZEROTOLERANCE

19

www.pnp.co.zaAbout usPartnering to shift  the food systemReducing environmental  impactsESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023A toll-free confidential reporting service operated by an independent whistleblowing service provider enables employees to raise concerns about 
potentially unethical, unlawful or unsafe conduct or practices that conflict with our Values and Code of Ethics.

To foster our desired culture of values, we have started implementing a multi-year campaign to deepen awareness of the Group’s values and 
ethics through behaviour-based initiatives. Supporting this drive and the delivery of our five-year employment equity (EE) plan in South Africa, 
which sets progressive EE targets and commitments, we have developed a diversity and inclusion (D&I) strategy which provides a roadmap to 
deliver on clear objectives.

We take deliberate action to achieve employment equity and gender targets. EE headcounts form part of KPIs of all personnel who make decisions 
about hiring and promotions. Our progress in advancing retail-specific learnerships for our employees contributed to the Group’s overall  B-BBEE 
rating improving from Level 7 to 5.

Women represent 64% of the workforce and 32% of top and senior management. 

More than 4 000 jobs created in Boxer, Clothing and Omnichannel growth engines. 

We  provide  opportunities  for  people  living  with  disabilities  (in  most  cases,  a  learning  difficulty)  through  our  retail  operations  learnership 
programme. At year-end Pick n Pay employed 617 and Boxer 252 people with disabilities, with 10 in managerial positions. To address the decline 
in representation from 896 to 869, we are engaging with our managers to help them better understand how to provide more individualised 
support to promote retention.

Our permanent employee turnover rate of 19% is in line with the industry benchmark. 

Value chain

Talent management and development
The  Group  has  always  supported  colleagues  of  all  ages  with  opportunities  to  gain  new  skills  and  knowledge  and  to  develop  themselves.  
Our investments in training strive to align meeting business needs with delivering on our diversity and transformation goals.

We promote from within and seek the best talent available locally and, when necessary, globally. Programmes to ensure ongoing talent pipeline 
progress include our 12-month training and work experience programme for graduates, Chartered Accountant (SA) programme, retail business 
performance management programme for middle management, and learnership programmes.

The Group invested R102 million in learning and skills development in FY23. HDSA employees accounted for 97% of those trained, of which 65% 
are women. 

Labour/human capital

Our innovative cloud-based Pick n Pay HR system “Workday” introduced last year is increasingly improving our capability and delivery through 
digitalisation. The platform keeps all our people data on one core system and empowers our employees and line managers to manage their working 
life better through self-service and personal development tools. Workday can be accessed through any browser or an app on a phone. Boxer uses 
Yobic in Boxer owned stores with similar functionality. We provide devices in most company-owned stores for people who do not have devices.

Through Workday, Pick n Pay has doubled the number of e-learning courses offered to employees. The number of e-learning courses completed 
during FY23 more than doubled compared to the previous year. Focus areas have included multi-skilling employees in stores to be able to perform 
more diverse tasks, training frontline workers and our growing team of on-demand delivery (asap!) pickers, and providing training to support the 
delivery of our Ekuseni ambitions. Pick n Pay’s redesigned trainee manager programme is delivered largely through Workday over a much shorter 
period of 18 to 30 months. 

Advanced e-learning in Pick n Pay

10 courses with 87 lessons

Udemy for Business +8 000 courses offered

Additional trainee manager programme with 257 lessons

E-learning courses completed in FY23 – 92 353

Pick n Pay has also rolled out access to our e-learning courses to our franchise stores in South Africa. Building on its internal content, Pick n Pay 
has introduced the Udemy for Business platform for skills development as a responsive and flexible way of providing a broad range of courses to 
employees in our corporate functions, as well as managers in company-owned store operations. Employees can access high-end courses that 
deliver relevant skills on demand and complete them when convenient.

The Group invests in building a strong and diverse leadership team. As part of succession planning, we conduct talent mapping to identify and 
fill talent gaps in the organisation. We strive to train and develop skills and provide adequate support and mentoring to ensure progression and 
succession  in  the  business  is  robust  and  effective.  We  have  strengthened  our  change  management  capability  and  are  reviewing  our  talent 
management programmes and performance management approach with the aim of enhancing their role in promoting delivery of our ambitious 
strategic objectives and performance targets. We completed a review of the effectiveness of the Long-Term Incentive (LTI) scheme in respect of 
retention and the incentivisation of performance. The LTI includes at least at two specific sustainability performance indicators for each of our 
executives and head of departments.

We are committed to fair and equitable remuneration practices across the Group, including a focus on improving income disparity at lower levels 
of management, and providing a fair wage for our employees. Guaranteed pay and variable benefits are benchmarked against industry norms. The 
provision of retirement and health care benefits is a key part of our employee value proposition. 

20

www.pnp.co.za

21

About usPartnering to shift  the food systemReducing environmental  impactsSupporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleESG/sustainability  databookAppendicesESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023ESG DATABOOK

This section reviews the Group’s response to sustainability/ESG impacts, risks and 
opportunities against the disclosure guidance presented by the JSE Limited (JSE) in its 
Sustainability Disclosure Guidance published in June 2022.

The  Group’s  ESG  disclosure  adopts  a  double  materiality  approach  in  alignment  with  the  JSE  guidance.  Accordingly,  the  tables  that  follow  
include topics material to our ability to create or protect enterprise value, as well as those that address our impact on society, the environment 
and the economy. 

SUSTAINABILITY GOVERNANCE 

Board oversight
The Pick n Pay Stores Limited Board 
of Directors has ultimate oversight 
of sustainability and ESG-related 
issues pertinent to the business, 
including the process of integrating 
sustainability into our strategy, 
decision-making and governance 
practices.

issues  present  both 

ESG 
increasing  challenges  and 
opportunities within the South African retail environment. Our 
response to these issues is informed by the Group’s enduring 
family values, our Code of Ethics and our founding belief that 
companies  have  a  significant  role  to  play  in  addressing  the 
social and environmental challenges of our time.

The Board oversees the process of sustainability integration 
across  the  Group.  We  recognise  that  this  is  a  complex  and 
multi-faceted process, requiring a multi-horizon perspective. 
Our ESG framework guides Group-wide decision-making and 
action in this respect. 

The  Social,  Ethics  and  Transformation  committee  oversees 
the Group-wide process of sustainability/ESG integration and 
plays  an  active  role  in  monitoring  the  Group’s  activities  and 
disclosure in terms of ESG-related legislation, regulations and 
codes of best practice. 

For  further  detail,  please  refer  to  the 
Transformation Committee (SETC) Report.

  Social,  Ethics  and 

Sustainability governance structure 
Environmental  and  social  challenges  impact  virtually  all  aspects 
of  our  business  –  from  products  and  packaging  to  our  growth 
opportunity  in  the  value  market  to  employees’  interest  in  our 
broader  social  purpose  and  contribution.  Our  sustainability 
governance structure is focused on progressing the integration of 
these considerations into decision-making and Group operations.

Board accountability

Pick n Pay Stores Limited Board of Directors

(14 directors)

Audit, Risk and Compliance 

Committee

Nominations and Corporate 

Governance Committee 

Social, Ethics and  

Transformation Committee

Remuneration Committee

Executive leadership

Executive committee

Cross-functional leadership

Executive sustainability steering committee

Cross-functional working group and ad hoc steering 
committee

Sustainability team

Operational sustainability steering committee

Our  sustainability  governance  structure  remains  unchanged. 
However, the topic received significant focus during the year. We 
continue to engage The Ethics Institute of South Africa to assist 
us with governance training.

  Oversight 

 

  Operational implementation

Skills, competencies and access to 
diversity of views
The  Group’s  directors  are  diverse  in  terms  of  gender,  race 
and  professional  backgrounds.  They  contribute  different 
perspectives  to  enhance  decision-making  and  improve  our 
reflection on issues under consideration by the Board. Directors 
are well-placed to consider the significant range of sustainability 
issues pertinent to our operations and value chain, as well as to 
our growth ambitions in our respective retail markets.

The  ESG  executive,  Vaughan  Pierce,  has  direct  access  to 
the  Board,  which  enhances  our  ability  to  drive  top-down 
integration. The sustainability team keeps the Social, Ethics and 
Transformation Committee (SETC) and the Board abreast of the 
latest developments. Where particular professional skill sets are 
required, we contract advisors and consultants accordingly.

Remuneration
Management  reviews  the  performance  of  all  employees  each 
year.  We  are  committed  to  fair  and  equitable  remuneration 
practices  across  the  Group,  including  a  focus  on  improving 
income disparity at lower levels of management, and providing a 
fair wage for our employees.

During  this  reporting  year,  we  completed  a  review  of  the 
effectiveness  of  the  LTI  policy  in  respect  of  the  objectives  of 
Ekuseni. The new policy includes at least two specific sustainability 
performance indicators for each of our executives. 

Please refer to the 

 Remuneration Report for further information.

Policies, codes and guidance 
frameworks
We  continue  to  develop  and  refine  policies  that  govern  our 
approach  to  material  ESG  issues.  These  include  policies  for 
climate and energy, sustainable packaging, seafood, palm oil and 
recombinant Bovine Somatotropin (rBST), water and waste, and 
a broad range of employee and ethics-related policies.

policies 

Our 
https://www.picknpayinvestor.co.za/doing-good.php.

available 

are 

our  website 

on 

at  

Our  ESG  reporting  and  disclosures  are  informed  by  the  Task  
Force  on  Climate-Related  Financial  Disclosures  (TCFD),  the  
Global  Reporting 
Initiative  (GRI)  Standards,  and  the  Value 
Reporting  Foundation’s  Sustainability  Accounting  Standards 
Board  (SASB)  Standards.  We  are  tracking  developments  with 
respect  to  the  International  Sustainability  Standards  Board 
(ISSB)  and  are  pleased  to  note  increasing  alignment  emerging 
in  ESG  expectations,  both  globally  and  in  relation  to  the 
Sustainability Disclosure Guidance published by the JSE in 2022. 
We believe our approach is well-placed to guide our sustainability 
disclosure efforts into the future.

Further standards or guidance frameworks with which we align 
and that continue to inform our disclosure include: 

 • King IV Report on Corporate Governance
 • Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
 • United Nations Global Compact
 • CDP Climate Change
 • CDP Water

ESG disclosure and communication
We integrate ESG-related issues pertinent to the creation and protection of enterprise value in our Integrated Report. We continue to supplement 
our reporting suite with an 

 ESG Data Book. 

We continue to enhance our disclosure capability and presently disclose against more than 1 300 ESG indicators across a range of ratings 
agencies  and  guidance  document  criteria  with  more  than  210  reported  on  in  our  ESG  Data  Book.  Specifically,  we  are  working  towards 
increased disclosure and transparency on:

 • Climate-related risks and opportunities
 •
 • Human rights and fair trade across the supply chain

Labour and wage practices

The Group is one of the top 3 retailers in South Africa on the IRAS Sustainability/ESG Data Transparency Index (SDTI). The Pick n Pay Group 
is assessed and scored against ESG indices, including the FTSE Russell, S&P Dow Jones and MSCI. We have retained our listing on the FTSE/
JSE Responsible Investment Index Series and are presently listed on the FTSE4Good Emerging Index.

Our ESG data management system is integral to our ability to meet the evolving disclosure expectations of our stakeholders. This year we 
have quantitatively reported against a more comprehensive set of performance indicators. We have developed high-level dashboards that 
align with the Ekuseni strategy. These are covered in detail in 

 Metrics, Targets and Performance. 

The integrity of all reports remains the responsibility of the Group Board of Directors. All sustainability-related information is approved 
by the Board’s Social, Ethics and Transformation Committee. Since 2022, our ESG Report has been subject to an internal and external 
assurance process. Accredited service providers have verified selected performance metrics contained in the report, as well as our carbon 
footprint and our B-BBEE rating.

Refer to our 

 combined assurance statement for further information.

22

www.pnp.co.za

23

About usPartnering to shift  the food systemReducing environmental  impactsSupporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleESG/sustainability  databookAppendicesESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023SUSTAINABILITY STRATEGY 

Increasing ESG integration across the Group’s operations
Our key goals and targets

The Group’s ESG framework prioritises sustainability-related issues that impact our ability 
to create, protect or enable value across a range of stakeholder groups.

Sustainability-related impacts, risks and opportunities 
Our  ESG  framework  is  based  on  analysis  of  ESG  impacts  and  dependencies  critical  to  our  business  model.  At  a  high  level,  these  have 
remained consistent, although details and emphases shift in accordance with changing operational environments and stakeholder 
interests. 

Key ESG issues material to our business model include:

 • Access to quality, nutritious food at affordable prices 
 • Carbon emissions (including carbon disclosure) 
 • Energy use (fuel and electricity)
 • Waste, in particular plastic and food waste
 • Water intensity 
 • Promoting products with sustainability attributes
 • Supplier ESG practices and ethical sourcing
 •
Local suppliers
 • Transformation
 • Employee training and development
 • Employee health and wellness
 • ESG data and data accuracy

Materiality determination 
Selected executives and senior managers engage in a facilitated materiality process to reflect on a broad range of issues that could 
significantly impact on the Group’s ability to create and sustain value. This process allows us to sense-check the relevance of identified 
ESG issues, potential risks to enterprise value and our ability to turn these risks into opportunities for value creation. 

Our materiality review is primarily driven through the risk management process. It forms part of the Group’s comprehensive, enterprise-
wide risk management and combined assurance programme.

Strategic framework 
The  Group’s  ESG  framework 
informed  by  our  key 
sustainability/ESG issues. It plays an important role in informing 
decision-making in relation to current and emerging social and 
environmental challenges and opportunities. It also helps to align 
our  efforts  with  national  and  global  sustainable  development 
goals.

is 

The  following  focus  areas  are  addressed  in  the  respective 
sections of this report. Key elements are summarised here.

 Partnering to shift the food system

 Reducing environmental impact

 Supporting communities

 Investing in our people

Collaborating for a nature positive food system
For  well  over  a  decade,  WWF  South  Africa  and  Pick  n  Pay  have 
collaborated in various forms. 

This began in 2006 and was formalised in 2010 as a partnership to 
support WWF’s then Sustainable Fisheries (now Marine) Programme. 
The Marine Programme aims to restore at least half of the country’s 
over-exploited  fish  stocks  to  sustainably  managed  levels,  while 
maintaining or improving the state of other commercially important 
stocks. This is done by applying an Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries 
(EAF)  and  reducing  the  impacts  of  destructive  fishing  practices  to 
acceptable levels. 

In  2011,  Pick  n  Pay  announced  a  commitment  to  transform  its 
entire  fresh,  frozen  and  canned  seafood  operations  to  meet  strict 
sustainability standards. The commitment was the first of its kind in 
Africa.

In  2023,  WWF  and  Pick  n  Pay  are  continuing  their  marine  work 
together.  This  includes  not  only  supporting  fisheries  improvement 
projects that assist the continued development of the South African 
seafood sector, but also expanding the work to cover some key issues 
across the food system. 

In particular, the partnership will focus on helping Pick n Pay suppliers 
to better understand water risk, improve measurement of food loss/
waste and identify hotspots, and support suppliers in their own carbon 
emission reduction journeys.

This will also form part of Pick n Pay’s Scope 3 target setting process 
in terms of the Science-Based Targets Initiative (SBTI). 

The partnership will also aim to build awareness and understanding of 
key sustainability issues among Pick n Pay staff and customers, and 
engage with the Pick n Pay School Club.

Partnering to shift the food system
Food  is  a  fundamental  need  and  South  Africa’s  food  system 
remains  under  strain,  primarily  impacting  poorer  households. 
By  trading  under  three  main  customer-facing  banners,  our 
Ekuseni  strategy  has  made  it  possible  to  deliver  on  specific 
customer ESG interests and needs. These include lower pricing 
on  essentials  (typically  at  Boxer  and  QualiSave  stores)  and  a 
greater  range  of  sustainability  attributes  (typically  at  Pick  n 
Pay  stores).  Affordability  is  further  enhanced  by  our  Smart 
Shopper  loyalty  card,  which  continues  to  grow  from  9.5  million 
in FY22 to 11 million active members in FY23. Spearheading our 
exploration  of  sustainable  product  innovation,  the  Pick  n  Pay 
Live  Well  range  offers  a  green  range  for  consumers  who  seek 
explicitly  sustainable  attributes.  We  remained  focused  on  local 
procurement  and  are  extending  sound  ESG  practices  across 
our  supply  chain.  Our  inclusive  supply  chain  supports  hundreds 
of  emerging  entrepreneurs  and  ensures  that  our  supporting 
ecosystem is more resilient. By continuing to reduce food waste, 
we improve our productivity and assist in the fight against hunger 
through our partnership with FoodForward SA.

Reducing our environmental impact
We continue to invest in energy efficiency and the expansion 
of  renewable  energy.  This  commitment  further  supports 
route-planning  optimisation  and  the  reduction  of  product 
waste  at  our  distribution  centres  and  stores.  It  also  drives 
packaging innovations in support of the SA Plastics Pact drive 
for reusable, recyclable or compostable plastic packaging. As 
awareness  of  environmental  issues  grows,  environmental 
commitment  and  performance  are  integral  to  our  brand 
equity.  Evidence  of  our  commitment  and  progress  is  now 
facilitating our ability to access finance that is increasingly 
tied to sustainability provisions.

Supporting communities
We are committed to an inclusive and transformed organisation, and 
to ensuring that all our employees are healthy and well-trained. Our 
focus is on providing good jobs and working conditions, effective 
training,  competitive  remuneration  and  opportunity  to  progress. 
Diversity,  equity  and  inclusion  are  critical  to  effective  decision-
making,  and  we  continue  to  make  good  progress  on  our  broad-
based  black  economic  empowerment  commitments.  Stakeholder 
engagement  and  outreach  is  becoming  increasingly  important, 
given the systemic nature of many sustainability challenges and the 
need to work with our retail peers in advocating for positive change.

Investing in our people
Our  people  are  at  the  heart  of  what  we  do.  In  striving  to  be  an 
employer  of  choice,  our  commitment  to  employees  is  that  we 
provide  good  jobs,  effective  training  and  development  initiatives, 
competitive  pay,  good  working  conditions  and  an  opportunity  to 
progress. We created more than 4 000 jobs in Boxer, Clothing and 
Omnichannel and implemented a multi-skilling agreement essential 
to deliver higher store productivity and customer service. Our junior 
Store  Management  Modernisation  will  deliver  greater  efficiency 
and  clarity  and  the  Pick  n  Pay  Voluntary  Severance  Programme 
(VSP) will enable us to accelerate savings while giving colleagues 
choice on participation.

We seek to ensure that the composition of our employee base at all 
levels accurately reflects wider society. We use our skills base and 
diversity  as  an  advantage  in  building  an  engaged,  innovative  and 
successful business.

24

www.pnp.co.za

25

Our  ESG  focus  areas  align  with  the  Ekuseni  strategy,  as  discussed  further  below.  This  ensures  that  our  commitment,  disclosure  and  transparency  
on hard ESG targets are sustainable for the organisation while delivering measurable stakeholder value in line with the global UN Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs).

About usPartnering to shift  the food systemReducing environmental  impactsSupporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleESG/sustainability  databookAppendicesESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023Stakeholder value creation/erosion 

Government (Rm)

587.7

497.2

497.0

Retained for growth (Rm)

 1 601.0

 1 577.3

 1 554.3 

14%
Retained for 
growth

4%
Government

12%
Providers 
of capital

R11.9 billion
Value for 

stakeholders

2021

2022

2023

2021

2022

2023

Providers of capital (Rm)

1 536.3

1 403.0

1 172.3

Employees (Rm)

8 347.9

70%
Employees

7 959.0

7 836.3

2021

2022

2023

2021

2022

2023

The year-on-year fluctuations in the value distributed to stakeholders over the past three years reflect the financial impact of significant trade 
disruption over the period, including the Covid-19 pandemic (FY21), civil unrest (FY22) and more recently, elevated levels of load-shedding (FY23). 
Please refer to the CFO’s report on page 68 of the IAR for each period for further information.

Integration into business strategy and planning 
Our  strategic  plan,  Ekuseni,  was  launched  in  May  2022.  Ekuseni’s 
overall goal is to serve more customers better and create more jobs, 
while reducing our negative impact on the environment. Each element 
of Ekuseni opens opportunity for greater ESG integration and greater 
potential for positive ESG impact at scale:

Building on our core strengths, the strategy focuses on: 

Refined and strengthened Pick n Pay customer value proposition

1. 
2.  Accelerating the growth of Boxer
3.  Building a market leading online offer
4. 
5.  Delivery through our people

Funding our ambition through Project Future

ESG  integration  into  our  business  strategy  is  covered  in  our  

 Chief Executive Officer’s statement and summarised here.

1.  A Refined and Strengthened Customer Value 

Proposition (CVP) for Pick n Pay

In the face of increasing social and environmental pressures, ESG 
integration is key to our refined and strengthened value proposition. 
Key areas of integration addressed by our teams include:

 • Decoupling of our customer-facing brands into three banners, 

has enabled us to simultaneously increase affordability and 
introduce new sustainable product attributes

 • Relentless focus on cost reduction, allowing us to maintain 

affordability of staples in the face of a highly volatile 
commodity market

 • By reducing our environmental impact, we enhance efficient 

cash and capital management and operational excellence

 • Firm environmental targets driving further savings through 

energy conservation, expansion of renewable energy and 
waste reduction

2. Accelerating Boxer Growth
Targeting the lower LSM market, Boxer is the leading limited-range 
discounter in Africa. Accelerating growth recognises the opportunity 
in underserved markets, and key areas of integration include:

 • More affordable, quality nutrition
 •
 • The ability to address complex challenges such as the need to 

Increased job opportunities

meet higher ESG standards while simultaneously increasing 
affordability and inclusion

Potential trade-offs 
 • Use of diesel (to counter load-shedding) vs carbon footprint – 

requires that we accelerate our transition to renewables

 • Just in time to just in case (recognising supply chain disruption) 

– requires increasing agility of procurement teams and 
optimised stock management

 • Building a future-fit, high performing team and extending 

employment opportunities vs Voluntary Severance Programme 
in the light of increased pressure and operational constraints

 • Access in township areas vs safety and civil disruption – requires 
awareness on the ground and ability to respond quickly to signals

3. Building a Market Leading Online Offer
Digital  technology  allows  us  to  scale  positive  social  and 
environmental  impacts  through  multiple  stakeholder  networks. 
Key areas of integration include:

 • An on-demand food grocery offering, with engagements 

 •

underway to transition to e-bikes in the near future
Improved inventory and returns management  
(waste reduction)

 • Streamlined engagement and feedback channels  

(customer insights) 

 • Effective tracking of ESG impacts (data management)

4. Funding our Ambition through Project Future
Given the increasing ESG focus of the investment community and 
financial  services  sector,  positive  ESG  performance  is  opening 
access  to  preferential  terms  and  lines  of  funding.  Key  areas  of 
integration include:

 • Our modernisation and efficiency plan, which has incorporated 

energy, water and waste reductions

 • A shift to science-based targets for greenhouse gas emissions 
and our commitment to disclose in terms of the Task Force on 
Climate-Related Financial Disclosures

 • Our new lines and long-term borrowings include ESG targets 

for lower funding rates

5. Delivery through People
We  are  building  a  future-fit,  high-performance  team.  By  making 
management  teams  more  diverse,  we  access  critical  business 
intelligence  and  networks  informed  by  diverse  experiences  and 
backgrounds. Key areas of ESG integration include:

 • Job opportunities and talent retention
 • Diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI)
 • Skills development and learning
 • Effective hybrid working

We  are  committed  to  further  pursue  and  scale  positive 
sustainability impact through our core business and include data 
on all the above elements in the 

 ESG/Sustainability Databook.

 • Using local vs lower cost overseas – requires long-term 

investment in local capabilities, particularly relevant in clothing

 • Personalisation vs keeping costs low – requires digitalisation
 •

Local suppliers vs high standards of ESG – requires supply 
chain support and tracking

 • Packaging cost reductions vs commitment to reusable/
recyclable/compostable content – requires packaging 
innovation (e.g. moving back to plastic as a result of customer 
feedback and cost)

 • Speed to market vs route and load optimisation – requires 

smart logistics 

26

www.pnp.co.za

27

About usPartnering to shift  the food systemReducing environmental  impactsSupporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleESG/sustainability  databookAppendicesESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023MANAGEMENT APPROACH

The Group recognises the interconnectedness of ESG issues and the need to integrate 
such considerations into the full spectrum of our management processes. We are 
informed by longer-term considerations, helping to orient our management practices 
to sustainable growth.

Integration into risk management
The  Group’s  risk  management  process  addresses  all  risks  to  the  business,  including  ESG-related  risks.  Our  ESG  risks  are  focused  in  
three areas:

 • Climate risk is a pervasive and highly-interconnected risk, with extreme weather events posing a risk to our accessibility, store 

network and vehicle fleets. Given the strong investor focus on climate risk, our response to these risks may also impact our cost of 
capital going forward.

 • We have a large supply chain and depend on many companies’ commitment to ethical and sustainable practices. In support of our 

strong commitment to local suppliers, it is imperative that we build on current efforts to promote, track and support ethical and 
sustainable practices across our supplier network.

 • We operate a large, highly distributed store network. Given that our stores must remain accessible to all our customers, civil unrest 

remains a key risk, both before and after mitigation.

Given South Africa’s current challenges and a strong investor focus on anti-corruption, ethics is an important cross-cutting element of  
our risk culture.

Refer to the 

 Risk Management report in the IAR for further information. 

Integration into opportunity identification and capture
Our  strategic  focus  on  partnering  to  shift  the  food  system  requires  a  keen  awareness  of  South  African  social  dynamics  and  trends. 
Integration into opportunity identification and capture includes: 

 • Affordable essentials in underserved markets (Boxer and QualiSave)
 • Expansion of sustainability-related product ranges (Live Well)
 • A steadfast reduction in food waste 
 • Advocacy opportunities, including the instrumental role we played in the Retail CEO letter to President Ramaphosa on the energy crisis

While the Group has limited opportunity to address national energy and climate challenge at scale, our commitment to reducing environmental 
impacts continues to open opportunities for:

 • Electricity conservation at stores and distribution centres
 • Renewable energy installation 
 •

Improved efficiencies in our distribution operations

Investing  in  people  and  communities  enhances  the  social  ecosystems  that  underpin  our  success.  Our  large  supply  chain  presents  a 
significant opportunity for:

Local supply chain support (85% of Pick n Pay private label products locally sourced)

 •
 • Small, medium and micro enterprise support
 • Scaling positive ESG practices through our supplier network

CSI efforts continue to support our strategic focus areas, at times piloting scalable interventions. 

 • Our Feed the Nation food drive, food gardens, and partnership with FoodForward SA supports our commitment on partnering to shift 

the food system

 • Our Pick n Pay and Boxer School Club environmental and recycling drives, as well as the social media platform, expands our 

environmental efforts to communities across South Africa

Please refer to our 

 ESG/Sustainability Databook for detailed information on how we are responding to these opportunities. 

Integration into planning and  
decision-making
The  Pick  n  Pay  Group  is  committed  to  ESG  integration  into 
planning  and  decision-making  across  all 
its  operations. 
Informed  by  an  analysis  of  material  sustainability  issues, 
our  ESG  Framework  provides  direction  and  guidance  and 
is  taken  into  consideration  during  our  strategy  sessions, 
business  planning  cycles  and  relevant  day-to-day  decisions. 
Performance 
focus  area  highlight 
initiatives already underway, helping decision-makers to align 
available skills and capabilities and draw on internal experience.  
We  are  developing  targets  that  provide  clarity  on  our  
strategic  ambitions  in  relation  to  each  of  the  focus  areas.  
  Metrics,  Targets  and 
These  are  presented 
Performance section below.

indicators 

for  each 

in  the 

Integration into management systems
Sustainability  is  a  cross-cutting  function.  To  achieve  the 
transition  we  seek,  we  are  reviewing  existing  management 
systems for integration opportunities and using digital platforms 
to  enhance  inter-operability.  This  supports  our  alignment  with 
best practice and will increase our resilience into the future.

Our key sustainability-related management systems include:

 • Risk management (see above)
 • Safety, Health and Environment (SHE) management
 • Quality management
 • Data management
 • Disclosure management

Integration into innovation
Sustainability thinking is becoming a part of our culture and will increasingly inform the innovative efforts of our teams. We believe everyone 
can make a contribution, no matter how small. Key innovation areas informed by our sustainability commitments include: 

 • Affordability
 • New products (including sustainable product ranges such as Live Well)
 • Packaging reduction
 • Process improvements (including operational and logistics efficiencies)
 • Supply chain development (including local, SMME and ESG support)

METRICS, TARGETS AND 
PERFORMANCE

The Pick n Pay Group recognises the importance of ESG metrics and targets to 
support our allocation of effort and enhance our communication with stakeholders.

ESG performance 
We  are  progressing  on  each  of  our  ESG  focus  areas,  as 
 

 ESG Report and 

 ESG Databook for further information on our performance.

indicated  by  reported  performance  trends.  Please  refer  to  our 

ESG data 
ESG data falls within the scope of the Group’s data management practices. We are increasingly digitising our data process and have expanded 
the scope of our online waste management dashboard to include carbon, electricity and water variables. In addition to helping us collate and 
retain accurate ESG data, our data systems ensure that our Group and customer’s rights to privacy and confidentiality are not breached. ESG 
data management has matured through the publication of a stand-alone Sustainability Report since 2008. Looking ahead, we anticipate further 
expansion of digital data platforms, as well as increased integration and inter-operability.

Verification and assurance 
All  ESG  information  in  our  integrated  reporting  suite  has  been  approved  by  the  Board.  Accredited  service  providers  have  assured  selected 
non-financial  performance  metrics,  including  the  Group’s  broad-based  black  economic  empowerment  (B-BBEE)  rating  and  carbon  footprint. 
Management has verified the processes for measuring all other non-financial information.

Combined assurance refers to internal and external parties working together to assure information communicated to stakeholders. Our combined 
assurance model is the responsibility of the Audit, Risk and Compliance Committee and is designed to cover the organisation’s significant risks 
and material matters. 

Please refer to our 

 Audit, Risk and Compliance Report for further information.

28

www.pnp.co.za

29

About usPartnering to shift  the food systemReducing environmental  impactsSupporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleESG/sustainability  databookAppendicesESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023GROUP ESG/SUSTAINABILITY 
PERFORMANCE DATA

All data contained in this databook is for the Group unless otherwise specified in the subheading of the specific 
section, or in the indicator itself.

ESG/Sustainability Databook

Economic

FY23

FY22

FY21

FY20

GRI STANDARDS SASB STANDARDS

JSE COMMENTS

1
2
3
4

5
6
7
8

9

10

11
12
13

14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

Rand Million Value of Total Turnover Generated
Rand Million Value of Total Turnover Generated in South Africa
Percentage of Turnover Generated in South Africa
Rand Million Value of Total Revenue Generated per Employee, including full time and variable  
time employees
Rand Million Value of Net Profit After Tax Generated
Rand Value of Net Profit After Tax per Employee, including full time and variable time employees
Rand Million Value of Total Compensation Paid to Employees, including wages and benefits
Average Compensation Paid to Employees , including wages and benefits of full time and variable 
time employees
Total Rand Million Value of Compensation Paid to Executive Directors – Excluding Gains Realised 
from LTI Awards
Total Rand Million Compensation Paid to Executive Directors and Key Management Personnel 
– excluding 'gains realised from LTI awards'
Ratio of Net Profit After Tax per Employee to Average Compensation per Employee
Rand Billion Value of Total Discretionary/Measured Procurement Spend (South Africa Only)
Rand Million Value of Total Taxes Paid, inclusive of VAT, income tax, royalties, rates & taxes, and all 
other payments to Government
Rand Million Value of Total Taxes Paid in South Africa 
Percentage of Total Taxes Paid in South Africa 
Rand Million Value of Payments to Providers of Capital
Rand Million Value of Dividends Paid to Shareholders
Rand Million Value of Retained Earnings 
Ratio of Payments to Employees relative to Dividends paid to Shareholders
Ratio of Payments to Government relative to Dividends paid to Shareholders
Rand Million Value of Current Assets – Total
Rand Million Value of Current Liabilities – Total
Rand Million Value of Capital Expenditures (Capex)

38 555

49 130

79 749

30 070

 106 561.8
 102 721.3
96.4%
1.8

 1 169.9
 19 649.0
 8 347.9
139 553

108.9

0.1
85.6
2 035

1 937
95.2%
 1 416.0
 881.5
 4 685.2
9.5
0.6
 17 495.6
 23 529.1
 4 000.0

 97 872.8
 94 535.2
96.6%
1.7

1 214.5
21 310.4
 7 836.3
137 501

143.7

0.2
–
2 571

2 471
96.1%
 1 521.6
 1 081.1
4 717.3
7.2
0.5
 19 250.8
 22 972.3
 2 500.0

 93 078.8
 89 919.2
96.6%
1.7

967.1
17 519.9
 7 959.0
144 184

–

0.1
–
2 669

2 584
96.8%
 1 231.0
 876.0
4 573.5
9.1
0.6
 16 648.5
 20 107.6
 1 600.0

 89 186.5
 85 628.3
96.0%
1.7

1 194.7
21 761.4
 7 368.2
134 211

–

0.2
–
2 688

2 563
95.3%
 1 602.9
 1 039.4
 4 303.2
7.1
0.5
 12 886.7
 16 303.6
 1 700.0

201-1
201-1

201-1

201-1

2-19

204-1
201-1

201-1
201-1

201-1
201-1

S2.4a

S2.4a

S2.4a

G5.1a & S2.4a

Reported for the first time in FY23
FY23 tax rate at 31% remains aligned with prior years

FY23 tax rate at 31% remains aligned with prior years

Prior year reporting updated to align to current year methodology

Prior year reporting updated to align to current year methodology
Prior year reporting updated to align to current year methodology

–  Not reported in given financial year 
*  Prior years' data updated to reflect FY23 reporting methodology and/or due to more reliable data becoming available 

30

www.pnp.co.za

31

About usPartnering to shift  the food systemReducing environmental  impactsSupporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleESG/sustainability  databookAppendicesESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023Jonathan Ackerman retired as exec director and appointed as non-exec 
director on 31 March 2023

FY20

GRI STANDARDS SASB STANDARDS

JSE COMMENTS

ESG/Sustainability Databook

Governance

Number of Board Members
Number of Board Members who are deemed Non-Executive
Percentage of Board Members who are deemed Non-Executive
Number of Board Members who are deemed Executive
Number of Board Members who are deemed 'Independent'
Percentage of Non- Executive Board Members who are deemed 'Independent'

Number of Board Members who are deemed 'HDSA'
Percentage of Board Members who are deemed 'HDSA'
Number of Board Members who are Women
Percentage of Board Members who are Women
Average Length of Executive Director Service (in years)
Average Length of Non-Executive Director Service (in years)
Average Length of Director (full Board) Service (in years)
Average Age of Directors (in years)
Overall Board and Committee Meeting attendance
Name of Financial Auditor

Auditor Remuneration: % of Non-audit Fees
Length of Current Auditor's service
Independence of Board Chairman
Does the company have a publicly available policy on Board Conflicts of Interest & Politically 
Exposed Persons?
Does the company provide public disclosure on any/all Board member Politically Exposed Persons 
(PEP)?
Does the Board sign off on publicly available Climate Related Financial Disclosures, as per TCFD?                       
Does the company have a publicly available human rights policy?
Does the company include ESG into service level agreements with suppliers?
Does the company formally audit suppliers and contractors for ESG compliance  
(including human rights)?
Are shareholders given the right to vote on executive remuneration, and is the vote binding?
Are shareholders given the right to vote on sustainability-related resolutions, and are the  
votes binding?
Does the company publicly disclose its voting record on sustainability-related resolutions and are 
the votes binding?
Is executive remuneration linked to ESG (i.e., is a proportion of remuneration/bonuses linked to 
Health, Safety and/or Environmental performance)?
Is the company’s policy on Board Gender Diversity and Board Race Diversity publicly available?
Does the company publicly provide targets with respect to Board Gender and Race Diversity?
Does the company publicly provide progress against these targets?
Does the company publicly disclose AGM minutes?
Does the company's publicly disclosure of AGM minutes include the Q&A session?
Does the company disclose its positions on key policy positions (e.g., wage gap disclosure,  
min wage, carbon tax)?
Does the company have a Whistle-blower Programme in place? HOTLINE
Does the company have a Whistle-blower Programme in place? POLICY
Total amount of political contributions made to political parties
Is there a breakdown of political contributions per political party provided?
Rand value of losses resulting from legal proceedings (including fines) due to fraud, insider trading, 
antitrust, anti-competitive behaviour, market manipulation, malpractice or violations of other 
industry laws or regulations
Total number and/or percentage of operations that have undergone a human rights assessment
Does the company have formal stakeholder engagement policies in place, including mechanisms  
for stakeholders to raise issues?

24
25
26
27
28
29

30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39

40
41
42
43

44

45
46
47
48

49
50

51

52

53
54
55
56
57
58

59
60
61
62
63

64
65

FY23

 

 14
12
85.7%
2
8
66.7%

5
35.7%
5
35.7%
2.5
11.4
10.1
58.6
100.0%
Ernst & 
Young Inc.
0.0%
8
No
Yes

FY22

 

 14
10
71.4%
4
7
70.0%

5
35.7%
5
35.7%
9.6
13.9
12.5
60.2
100.0%
Ernst & 
Young Inc.
0.0%
7
No
Yes

FY21

 

 15
10
66.7%
5
7
70.0%

5
33.3%
5
33.3%
8.7
12.4
11.3
59.2
100.0%
Ernst & 
Young Inc.
2.2%
6
No
Yes

 

 13
7
53.8%
6
5
71.4%

4
30.8%
4
30.8%
7.7
15.9
12.7
59.6
88.5%
Ernst & 
Young Inc.
3.6%
5
No
Yes

n/a

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

n/a

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
0
n/a
0

0
Yes

n/a

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

n/a

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
0
n/a
0

0
Yes

n/a

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

n/a

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

–
–
0
n/a
0

0
Yes

n/a

–
–
Yes
Yes

n/a

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

–
–
0
n/a
0

0
Yes

2-9
2-9
2-9
2-9
2-9
2-9

2-9
2-9
2-9
2-9
2-9
2-9
2-9
405-1

2-11
2-15

2-19b

2-26
2-26
415-1
415-1
2-27

Partial
No

Partial
No

Partial
No

Partial
No

2-5a
2-23a
308-1 & 414-1
308-1 & 308-2 
& 414-2
2-20 & 2-21

FB-FR-430a.3 

FB-FR-270a.2 
& FB-FR-310a.4

G1.3
G1.3

G1.1
G1.1
G1.1
G1.1
G1.3
G1.3
G1.3
G1.3

S5.1c
S5.1c

G2.1

G1.1
G1.1
G1.1

G3.1c
G3.1c
G3.2b

G4.2

S2.1a

–  Not reported in given financial year 
*  Prior years' data updated to reflect FY23 reporting methodology and/or due to more reliable data becoming available 

32

www.pnp.co.za

33

About usPartnering to shift  the food systemReducing environmental  impactsSupporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleESG/sustainability  databookAppendicesESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023ESG/Sustainability Databook

FY23

FY22

FY21

FY20

GRI STANDARDS SASB STANDARDS

JSE COMMENTS

66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81

82

83
84
85

86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96

Labour
Pick n Pay company-owned and Boxer data consolidated from FY22

Number of Employees – Permanent
Number of Employees – Fixed Term (>90 Days)
Number of Employees – Temporary (<90 Days)
Total Number of Employees
Total Number of Contractor Employees
Total Number of Employees and Contractors 
Total Number of Employees and Contractors Operating in South Africa 
Percentage of Employees and Contractors Operating in South Africa 
Percentage of Management (Top and Senior) deemed 'HDSA'*
Percentage of Management (Top and Senior) who are Women*
Percentage of Employees who are deemed 'HDSA'
Percentage of Employees who are Women
Percentage of Employees who are 'Permanent'*
Number of Employees who are deemed 'Disabled'
Disabled Persons Rate
Percentage of Employees who Belong to a Trade Union*

Employee Turnover (i.e., number of persons who departed relative to the total number of 
employees at year end)
Total Number of Person Hours Worked (PHW)*
Total Number of Employees Trained for Skills, including internal and external training interventions
Total Number of Employees with Disabilities Trained for Skills, including internal and external 
training interventions
Percentage of Employees Trained in South Africa*
Rand Million Value of Employee Training Spend
Percentage of Training Spend in South Africa 
Total number of Person Days Lost due to Absenteeism 
Percentage of Total Person Days Lost due to Absenteeism
Total number of Person Days Lost due to Industrial Action (i.e., strike action)
Percentage of Total Person Days Lost due to Industrial Action
Percentage of Employees Under the Age of 30
Percentage of Employees Aged between 30 and 50
Percentage of Employees Over the Age of 50
The Total Rand Million Annual Remuneration of the Highest Paid Employee

Health and Safety

97

98

Number of Fatalities (i.e., injuries on duty leading to death, excluding the deaths of workers not 
occurring 'at work')
Number of Medical Treatment Cases (MTCs, i.e. injuries on duty leading to medical treatment,  
but no lost days)
Number of Lost Time Injuries (LTIs, i.e. injuries on duty leading to at least one lost day)**

Fatal Injury Frequency Rate (FIFR, i.e. number of Fatalities per 200 000 person hours worked)

99
100 Total Number of Recordable Injuries, including MTCs, LTIs and fatalities
101
102 Lost Time Injury Frequency Rate (LTIFR, i.e., Number of LTIs per 200 000 person hours worked)**
103 Total Recordable Injury Frequency Rate (TRIFR)*
104 Does the company report a LTIFR and/or TRIFR target?
105 Does the company's safety data include contractor injuries?
106 Total Number of Employees & Contractors Tested for HIV/AIDS
107

Total Number of Employees & Contractors Receiving Voluntary Counselling and Testing (VCT)  
for HIV/AIDS (i.e., counselled)

 108 049 863
 23 088
402

 103 951 584
 23 534
–

 59 540
 279
0
 59 819
 279
 59 819
 59 350
99.1%
78.0%
32.0%
99.0%
64.0%
99.53%
869
1.5%
44%

19%

99.5%
 102.1
99.5%
 357 385
2.73%
5
0.04%
33%
59%
8%
 24 690.3

0

167

1 214
1 490
0.00
2.25
2.76
No
No
 1 111
 1 111

 56 719
 272
0
 56 991
 272
 56 991
 56 558
99.2%
77.0%
31.0%
99.0%
64.0%
99.52%
896
1.6%
70%

16%

–
 102.6
–
321 371
2.54%
0
0.00%
–
–
–
 25 419.4

0

375

 1 247
 1 622
0.00
2.54
3.30
No
No
–
–

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

–

–
–
–

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

–

–
–
–

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

– 

– 

2-7b
2-7b
2-7b

2-8a
2-7a & 2-8a
2-7a & 2-8a
2-7a & 2-8a
405-1
405-1
405-1
405-1
2-7b
405-1

401-1

403-9a
404-1
404-1

404-1
404-1
404-1
403-9b

405-1
405-1
405-1
2-21

403-9a

403-9a

403-9a
403-9a
403-9a
403-9a
403-9a
403-9a
403-9b

0

102

 1 157
 1 259
0.00
2.3
2.5
No
No
–
–

 1 535
 1 535
0.00
3.07
-
No
No
–
–

FB-FR-310a.3 

S1.5a
S1.5a
S1.5a

S1.5b

S1.5a

S1.5a
S1.5a
S1.5a

S1.4b

S2.3b

S2.2

S2.2

S1.2c

S3.1a

S3.1b

Reported for the first time in FY23

Reported for the first time in FY23

S1.4c
S1.4c
S1.1a Reported for the first time in FY23
Reported for the first time in FY23
Reported for the first time in FY23

S3.1b See footnote **

See footnote **

Reported for the first time in FY23
Reported for the first time in FY23

2-30

FB-FR-310a.2 

FY22 reported only on employees belonging to bargaining unit (NMBU),  
FY23 reports on total company employees

–  Not reported in given financial year 
*  Prior years' data updated to reflect FY23 reporting methodology and/or due to more reliable data becoming available 
**  The Group’s injury data is skewed due to over reporting and classification issues. The Group is addressing its policies, procedures and controls to address inaccuracies 

of LTIs going forward.

34

www.pnp.co.za

35

About usPartnering to shift  the food systemReducing environmental  impactsSupporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleESG/sustainability  databookAppendicesESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023FY23

FY22

FY20

GRI STANDARDS SASB STANDARDS

JSE COMMENTS

FB-FR-250a.1
FB-FR-250a.2

Reported for the first time in FY23
S4.1b Reported for the first time in FY23

ESG/Sustainability Databook

Food Safety
Pick n Pay company-owned operations, not including Boxer

108 Number of High-risk Food Safety Violations
109 Number of Product Recalls
110 Number of Supplier site visits by PnP Food Technologists
111

112 Number of Food Safety Store Audits 
113 Number of Store Operational Health and Safety Audits 

Value Chain

114

Percentage of Pick n Pay Clothing Suppliers Registered on SEDEX

Number of Food Safety Product Tests (Including routine microbiological tests, residues, shelf-life, 
nutritional information)

115

Percentage of Pick n Pay Clothing Sourced from the Southern African Development Community 
(SADC)
Percentage Pick n Pay Clothing Locally Sourced
Food Waste – Number of Suppliers participating in the 10x20x30 Initiative

116
117
118 Number of Entrepreneurs enrolled in Enterprise and Supplier Development Programme
119 Number of Employees Providing Enterprise and Supplier Development Mentorship 
120 Palm Oil – Percentage Certified Sustainable Palm Oil in Pick n Pay Branded Products
121
Sustainable Seafood Percentage by Sales Value (excluding Boxer, South Africa only)
122 Sustainable Seafood Percentage by Number of Species (excluding Boxer, South Africa only)
123 Percentage Private Label Products Locally Sourced (excluding Boxer) 

124 Percentage Sustainably Sourced Cotton Clothing (BCI)*
125 Percentage Private Label Sow Crate Friendly Pork (excluding Boxer)
126 Spend on B-BBEE Businesses in Rand billion
127

Spend on Black-owned Businesses in Rand billion

128 Spend on Black Women-owned Businesses in Rand billion

129 Spend on Black-owned SMMEs in Rand billion

130 Spend on SMMEs in Rand billion

Property 

Total Number of Stores

131
132 Number of Stores in South Africa
133 Number of Company-owned Stores
134 Number of Franchise stores
135 Number of Associate-owned Stores
136 Number of New Stores Opened
137
138 Total Store Floorspace (m 2-million) – Company-owned Stores
139 Total Store Floorspace (m 2-million) – Franchise Stores

Total Store Floorspace (m 2-million) – All

FY21

 

–
–
789
 3 495

 540
 4 594

77%

43%

39%
20
112
122
30%
95%
–
95%

6.5%
100%
54.5
7.7

5.2

2.6

4.5

 1 991
 1 828
 1 172
758
61
112
2.7
1.9
0.8

 

–
–
917
 3 585

 635
 4 830

65%

– 

– 
20
86
43
– 
– 
– 
– 

– 
100%
52.0
8.4

4.8

2.7

4.6

 1 925
 1 771
 1 092
774
59
160
2.6
1.8
0.8

0
7
508
 2 405

 511
 4 556

83%

54%

44%
19
198
164
100%
89%
79%
85%

22.0%
100%
53.4
6.3

4.8

0.9

3.1

 2 204
 2 018
 1 385
747
72
175
2.8
2.1
0.7

–
–
769
 3 090

 554
 5 057

90%

46%

41%
20
187
150
100%
91%
–
95%

11.0%
100%
50.8
8.3

6.1

1.9

4.3

 2 081
 1 910
 1 244
773
64
139
2.7
2.0
0.7

FY23 reduction due to focus on high-risk suppliers
FY23 discontinuation of products due to CVP resulted in fewer Food Safety 
Product Tests 
FY23 reduction due to focus on high-risk suppliers
FY23 reduction due to focus on high-risk suppliers

FY23 decrease due to increased new supplier onboarding and subsequent 
SEDEX registration

One supplier has met 10x20x30 targets in FY23 

FY23 decrease as a result of SA sardine stock depletion
Reported for the first time in FY23
FY23 decrease as a result of brand decoupling and range assortment split 
across three banners

FY23 decrease as a result of brand decoupling and range assortment split 
across three banners
FY23 decrease as a result of brand decoupling and range assortment split 
across three banners
FY23 decrease as a result of brand decoupling and range assortment split 
across three banners
FY23 decrease as a result of brand decoupling and range assortment split 
across three banners

–  Not reported in given financial year 
*  Prior years' data updated to reflect FY23 reporting methodology and/or due to more reliable data becoming available 

36

www.pnp.co.za

37

About usPartnering to shift  the food systemReducing environmental  impactsSupporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleESG/sustainability  databookAppendicesESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023ESG/Sustainability Databook

Loyalty Programme & Customer satisfaction

Percentage Growth in Smart Shopper Loyalty Members 

140 Number of Active Smart Shopper Loyalty Members (million)
141
142 Percentage of Sales Transactions Through Smart Shopper Loyalty Cards
143 Rand Billion Value of Loyalty Savings Provided

Energy

 11.0
16.0%
80%
6.0

9.5
11.8%
80%
5.5

FY23

FY22

FY21

FY20

GRI STANDARDS SASB STANDARDS

JSE COMMENTS

144 Total Direct Energy Consumption (Gigajoules, GJ) – All fuels 

 1 033 300

 316 747

 9 563
 758 907

 3 225
 791 886

–
 773 025

– 
 853 185

302-1

FB-FR-130a.1 

FY23 increase as a result of increase in onsite generator usage due to 
load-shedding
FY23 increase as a result of increase in generator usage due to load-shedding

 7 579
 767 486
1.0%
7.10
2 762 950.00
 3 796 250
 35 130

 7 791
 799 677
1.0%
7.69
2 878 837.20
 3 167 537
 32 248

 7 773
 780 798
1.0%
7.75
2 810 872.80
–
–

 7 726
 860 911
0.9%
8.6
3 099 280.68
–
–

145 Direct Energy Efficiency: Total Direct Energy Consumed per Person Hour Worked (kJ/PHW)
146 Total Volume of Electricity Purchased (MWh) – excluding self-generated from solar, wind or other 

sources
Total Volume of Electricity Self-Generated (MWh) – i.e., from solar, wind or other sources

147
148 Total Volume of Electricity Consumed (MWh) – Purchased + Self-Generated 
149 Percentage of Electricity Consumed that was Self-Generated
150 Electricity Efficiency: Average Electricity Consumed per Person Hour Worked (kWh/PHW)
151
152
153

Total Indirect Energy Consumption (i.e., Electricity) in Gigajoules 
Total Direct and Indirect (i.e., Electricity) Energy Consumption in Gigajoules 
Total Energy Efficiency: Total Direct Energy & Indirect Energy Consumed per Person Hour Worked 
(MJ/PHW)

154 Does the company report a target for direct energy consumption, or reductions, and is it against a 

specific denominator (e.g. per PHW) ?

155 Does the company report a target for indirect energy consumption (i.e., electricity), or reductions, 

and is it against a specific denominator (e.g. per PHW) ?

156 Does the company report a target for TOTAL energy consumption , or reductions, and is it against  

a specific denominator (e.g. per PHW) ?

Carbon Footprint 

Total Carbon Emissions (tonnes CO2e) – Scope 1

157
158 Carbon Emissions (tonnes CO2e) – Scope 2
159 Carbon Emissions (tonnes CO2e) – Scope 3
160 Total Carbon Emissions (tonnes CO2e)

Carbon Intensity: Average Volume of Carbon Emissions per Person Hour Worked (tonnes CO2e/PHW)

161
162 Carbon emissions target against a prior baseline?
163 Baseline Year for Carbon Reduction Targets
164 Target for Carbon Emissions, or reduction, against a specific denominator (per PHW)
165 Volume of Carbon Emissions Offset via the Purchase of Carbon Credits (tonnes)
166 Volume of Carbon Emissions Offset via Company-owned Carbon Offset Projects (tonnes)
167 Rand Value of Spend on Carbon Offset Projects
168 GHG Emissions Intensity for Scope 1 Emissions expressed as Metric tonnes of CO2e per unit of 

Million Rands

Million Rands

169 GHG emissions Intensity for Scope 2 Emissions expressed as Metric tonnes of CO2e per unit of 

170 GHG Emissions Intensity for Scope 3 Emissions expressed as Metric tonnes of CO2e per unit of 

Million Rands
Does the company have a 'Just Transition' plan to meet decarbonisation targets?

171
172 Does the ‘Just Transition Plan' include stakeholder engagement for workers and communities?

Water
Pick n Pay company-owned operations, not including Boxer

173

Total Volume of Water Consumed (Kilolitres, or Kl) – New Purchases and/or Abstractions (excluding 
recycled water used)

174 Water Efficiency: Average Volume of Water (Litres) Consumed per Person Hour Worked (l/PHW)
175 Does the company have a water consumption target against a prior baseline?
176 Baseline Year for Water Reduction Targets
177

Does the company have a target for water consumption, or reduction, against a specific 
denominator (e.g. per PHW)?

–  Not reported in given financial year 
*  Prior years' data updated to reflect FY23 reporting methodology and/or due to more reliable data becoming available 

Yes

Yes

Yes

 14.8
Yes
2022
Yes
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.6

7.1

4.2

No 
n/a

10.26
Yes
2018
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

 15.0
Yes
2013
Yes
–

–
–

–

–

–
–

10.38
Yes
2018
Yes

302-1

302-1

302-4

305-1
305-2
305-3

305-5
305-5
305-5
305-5
305-5

305-4

305-4

305-4

8.5
– 
75%
3.5

 

–

No

Partial

Partial

 

 13.6
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

–

–

–
–

 

9.99
–
–
Yes

– 
– 
65%
– 

 

– 

No

No

No

 

 13.3
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

–

–

–
–

 

11.15
–
–
No

 381 435
 761 910
 452 280
 1 595 625

 183 614
 816 944
 475 222
 1 475 780

 123 421
 766 174
 482 615
 1 372 210

 124 858
 703 438
 507 967
 1 495 197

FB-FR-110b.1 

E1.1a
E1.1a
E1.1a

FY23 increase due to increased diesel consumption as a result of load-shedding
FY23 reduction due to decreased grid consumption as a result of load-shedding
FY23 reduction due to reduction in franchise store's Scope 2 emissions
FY23 increase largely due to increased diesel consumption as a result of 
load-shedding

Baseline adjusted to improve data accuracy 

E1.3

Reported for the first time in FY23
Reported for the first time in FY23
Reported for the first time in FY23
E1.1c Reported for the first time in FY23

E1.1c Reported for the first time in FY23

E1.1c Reported for the first time in FY23

E1.4a Reported for the first time in FY23
E1.4a Reported for the first time in FY23

 1 108 223

 1 019 918

 1 006 000

 1 117 000

303-5a

E2.1a

38

www.pnp.co.za

39

About usPartnering to shift  the food systemReducing environmental  impactsSupporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleESG/sustainability  databookAppendicesESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023189 Does the company have a Biodiversity Action Plan in place to minimise impacts on biodiversity 

E3.1c Working towards a Biodiversity Action Plan with WWF-SA for FY24

FY23

FY22

FY21

FY20

GRI STANDARDS SASB STANDARDS

JSE COMMENTS

ESG/Sustainability Databook

Waste
Pick n Pay company-owned operations, not including Boxer

Total Volume of Non-Hazardous Waste Disposed (tonnes) – excluding Food Waste – to Landfill*
Total Volume of Non-Hazardous Waste sent for Recycling (tonnes)*

Percentage of Non-Hazardous Waste disposed of that is sent for recycling*
Total Volume of Hazardous Waste Disposed (tonnes) – to Registered Disposal Sites*

178
179
180 Total Volume of Non-Hazardous Waste Disposed (tonnes) – to Landfill and Recycled*
181
182
183 Volume of Waste sent for Recycling (tonnes) – Plastic*
184 Volume of Waste sent for Recycling (tonnes) – Food Waste Recovered
185 Volume of Waste sent for Recycling (tonnes) – Glass*
186 Volume of Waste sent for Recycling (tonnes) – Metal*
187
188 Volume of Waste sent for Recycling (tonnes) – Cardboard and Paper

Volume of Waste sent for Recycling (tonnes) – Excess Food products donated*

Biodiversity

and ecosystems?

Environmental Management

190 Total Number of Environmental Incidents (Level 1, 2 and/or 3)
191
192
193 Rand Value of Carbon Tax Paid

Total Number of Environmental Fines and/or Non-Compliances
Total Number of Environmental Complaints

194 Rand value of spend on Climate Change Mitigation
195 CDP Climate
196 CDP Water

197 CDP Forest (Palm Oil/Soya/Beef/Timber)

CSI/SED and Enterprise Development (ED) Expenditures

198 Rand Million Value of Corporate Social Investment (CSI)/Socio-economic Development (SED) expenditures 
199 CSI/SED Spend as a Percentage of Total Revenue Generated
200 CSI Spend as a Percentage of Net Profit after Tax (NPAT) 
201 Percentage of Total CSI/SED Spend in South Africa 
202 Rand Million Value of CSI/SED Spend on Basic Needs & Social Development, including Nutrition 

and/or Feeding Programmes

203 Rand Million Value of CSI/SED Spend on Education
204 Rand Million Value of CSI/SED Spend in Environmental Management Projects 
205 Rand Million Value of CSI/SED Spend on Skills Development, including Adult Basic Education & 

Training (ABET)

206 Rand Million Value of CSI/SED Spend on Small Business Development Projects 
207 Does the report include a comprehensive discussion of returns on CSI?
208 Are CSI/SED projects clearly aligned to the company's Material Issues? 
209 Are CSI/SED projects clearly aligned to the company's Business Strategy? 
210 Are CSI/SED projects aligned to government’s National Development Plan (NDP)?
211

Rand Billion Value of Enterprise Development Spend (i.e., support for small business)

212 Volume of products donated to FoodForward SA (tonnes) 
213 Rand Million Value of distributions on behalf of Feed the Nation
214 Number of Meals Distributed for Feed the Nation (million)
215 Number of Schools in Pick n Pay and Boxer School Club
216 Number of Pick n Pay Foundation Home Food Gardens 
217
218 Number of Ackerman Pick n Pay Foundation Community Food Gardens

Volume of educational content distributed through Pick n Pay and Boxer School Club (tonnes)

–  Not reported in given financial year 
*  Prior years' data updated to reflect FY23 reporting methodology and/or due to more reliable data becoming available 

306-5
306-4

306-5

304-3

2-27a
2-27b
2-27

203-1

203-1
203-1

203-1
203-1
203-1

203-1
203-1

D/C/C/C

C/D/C

C/D/C

 12 757.0
 11 421.5
 26 025.1
43.9%
 30.6
1 360.7
 990.8
10.2
8.1
 882.0
10 019.6

No

 

 

0
0
0
 143 909

TBC
B
B

 39.1
0.041%
3.34%
100%
 11.1

 9.6
 3.5
 3.3

 11.6
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
 3.1

882
 17.8
 5.2
 3 280
 2 102
4.5
6 646

 14 342.5
 14 150.1
 29 407.5
48.1%
 27.6
 1 662.8
 914.0
 13.1
 10.8
 847.9
 13 500.0

 

–

 

B
B

0
0
0
 82 293

 37.9
0.039%
3.12%
100%
 11.4

 11.4
 2.1
 3.3

 9.7
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
 4.3

841
 30.6
 9.1
 3 185
 2 012
17
6 642

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

 

–

 

0
0
0
 69 505

B
A–

 41.3
0.043%
4.27%
100%
 14.3

 11.2
 1.5
 3.3

 11.1
Partial
– 
Yes
No
4.5

840
 135.0
 27.9
 3 155
 2 000
8.4
6 607

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

 

–

 

0
0
0
–

A–
B

–

–

 34.0
0.037%
2.85%
– 
– 

– 
– 
– 

– 
No
– 
Yes
– 
4.6

– 
– 
– 
3 025
1 963
–
–

E4.1a Consolidated waste service providers and increased data reliability in FY23
E4.1a Consolidated waste service providers and increased data reliability in FY23
E4.1a Consolidated waste service providers and increased data reliability in FY23
Consolidated waste service providers and increased data reliability in FY23
E4.1b Consolidated waste service providers and increased data reliability in FY23
Consolidated waste service providers and increased data reliability in FY23
Consolidated waste service providers and increased data reliability in FY23
Consolidated waste service providers and increased data reliability in FY23
Consolidated waste service providers and increased data reliability in FY23
Consolidated waste service providers and increased data reliability in FY23
Consolidated waste service providers and increased data reliability in FY23

FY23 increase due to an increase paraffin usage in Boxer bakeries and first 
year reporting coal emissions

G4.1
G4.2
G4.1

S2.4a

S2.4a

S2.4a
S2.4a
S2.4a

S2.4a

FY23 decrease as a result of brand decoupling and range assortment split 
across three banners

FY23 and FY22 decrease due to reduction in distributions post-Covid-19 peak period
FY23 and FY22 decrease due to reduction in distributions post-Covid-19 peak period

40

www.pnp.co.za

41

About usPartnering to shift  the food systemReducing environmental  impactsSupporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleESG/sustainability  databookAppendicesESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023CLIMATE-RELATED 
DISCLOSURES

We  recognise  the  importance  of  providing  stakeholders  with  clear 
and consistent information that enables them to evaluate our efforts 
in  addressing  climate-related  risks  and  understand  the  increasing 
societal expectations for transparency surrounding climate change. 

By  embracing  the  recommendations  of  the  Task  Force  on  Climate-
Related  Financial  Disclosures 
(TCFD),  we  are  reshaping  our 
management  and  reporting  approach  to  meet  these  demands. 
Through this alignment, we aim to provide stakeholders with reliable 
and  comprehensive  insights  into  our  climate-related  initiatives, 
ensuring accountability and promoting sustainable decision-making.

is  framed  around  four  key  areas:  climate-change 
The  TCFD 
governance,  risk,  strategy  and  performance.  This  approach 
is 
informing  other  sustainability  disclosure  standards  (for  example, 
those  of  the  global  Value  Reporting  Foundation)  and  guidance  (for 
example, that of the Johannesburg Stock Exchange). 

Pick n Pay’s response to the risks posed by climate change is covered 
primarily in our submissions to the CDP, which we regard as a leading 
measure of a business’s carbon strategy, disclosure and performance. 
Pick n Pay performed well in the 2022 CDP, receiving an B rating for 
CDP Climate and Water and D/C/C/C for Forest. 

The table below offers guidance on where to find information relating 
to each of the TCFD’s recommendations.

Disclosure related to the recommendations of the TCFD

References
CDP Climate Response 2022, section C1
CDP Climate Response 2022, section C1

References
CDP Climate Response 2022 (Q. C2 Risks and 
opportunities)
CDP Climate Response 2022 (Q. C3.1)

GOVERNANCE
Disclose the organisation’s governance around climate-related risks and opportunities.
Recommended disclosures
Describe the Board’s oversight of climate-related risks and opportunities.
Describe management’s role in assessing and managing climate-related risks 
and opportunities.
STRATEGY
Disclose the actual and potential impacts of climate-related risks and opportunities on the organisation’s businesses, strategy, 
and financial planning where such information is material.
Recommended disclosures
Describe the climate-related risks and opportunities the organisation has 
identified over the short, medium, and long term.
Describe the impact of climate-related risks and opportunities on the 
organisation’s businesses, strategy, and financial planning.
RISK MANAGEMENT
Disclose how the organisation identifies, assesses, and manages climate-related risks.
Recommended disclosures
Describe the organisation’s processes for identifying and assessing climate-
related risks.
Describe the organisation’s processes for managing climate-related risks.
Describe how processes for identifying, assessing, and managing climate-
related risks are integrated into the organisation’s overall risk management.
METRICS AND TARGETS
Disclose the metrics and targets used to assess and manage relevant climate-related risks and opportunities where such 
information is material.
Recommended disclosures
Disclose the metrics used by the organisation to assess climate-related risks 
and opportunities in line with its strategy and risk management process.
Disclose Scope 1, Scope 2, and, if appropriate, Scope 3 greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions, and the related risks.
Describe the targets used by the organisation to manage climate-related 
risks and opportunities and performance against targets.

References
CDP Climate Response 2022 (Q. C2.2, 2.3a)

CDP Climate Response 2022 (Q. C2.1, C2.2)
CDP Climate Response 2022 (Q. C2.1, C2.2)

References
CDP Climate Response 2022 (Q C2.2)

ESG Performance summary report page 12

ESG databook pages 40 - 42

CORPORATE INFORMATION

Pick n Pay Stores Limited 
Registration number: 1968/008034/06
JSE and A2X share code: PIK
ISIN: ZAE000005443
Board of directors
Executive 
Pieter Boone (CEO)
Lerena Olivier (CFO)
Non-executive
Gareth Ackerman (Chair)
Suzanne Ackerman1
Jonathan Ackerman2
David Robins
Independent non-executive
Haroon Bhorat
Mariam Cassim
James Formby3
David Friedland
Aboubakar Jakoet
Audrey Mothupi
Annamarie van der Merwe
Jeff van Rooyen
Registered office
Pick n Pay Office Park
101 Rosmead Avenue
Kenilworth
Cape Town 7708
Tel +27 21 658 1000
Fax +27 (0)86 675 1475
Postal address
PO Box 23087
Claremont
Cape Town 7735
Registrar
Computershare Investor Services Proprietary Limited
Rosebank Towers
15 Biermann Avenue
Rosebank 2196
Tel +27 11 370 5000
Postal address
Private Bag X9000
Saxonwold 2132

JSE Limited sponsor
Investec Bank Limited
100 Grayston Drive
Sandton 2196
Auditors
Ernst & Young Inc.

Principal transactional bankers
Absa Limited
First National Bank
Company Secretary
Penelope Gerber4
Email address: CompanySecretary@pnp.co.za
Promotion of Access to Information Act
informationofficer@pnp.co.za
Investor relations
Stephen Carrott
Email address: StephenCarrott@pnp.co.za
Website
Pick n Pay: www.pnp.co.za
Pick n Pay Clothing: www.picknpayclothing.co.za
Investor relations: www.picknpayinvestor.co.za
Customer careline
Pick n Pay
Tel: +27 860 30 30 30 
Email address: customercare@pnp.co.za

Boxer
Tel: +27 860 02 69 37
Email address: customercare@boxer.co.za
Online shopping
Tel +27 860 30 30 30
www.pnp.co.za
Engage with us on
 

 

 

 

 

 

1  Suzanne Ackerman retired as an executive director on 31 March 2022 and was appointed as a non-executive director on that date.
2  Jonathan Ackerman retired as an executive director on 31 March 2023 and was appointed as a non-executive director from that date.
3  James Formby was appointed as an independent non-executive director on 10 October 2022.
4  Penelope Gerber was appointed as Company Secretary on 31 July 2022.

Think before you print
Please consider the impact on the environment before printing this report.

42

www.pnp.co.za

43

Supporting  communitiesInvesting in  our peopleGroup ESG/sustainability  performance dataAppendicesAbout usPartnering to shift  the food systemReducing environmental  impactsESG Performance Summary and Databook 2023PNP.CO.ZA/PEOPLENPLANET

