SR

SASOL LIMITED
SUSTAINABILITY REPORT
for the year ended 30 June 2023

Progressing a sustainable Future Sasol

INTRODUCTION

Contents
INTRODUCTION
About this report
Progressing a sustainable Future Sasol
What sustainability means for Sasol
Our journey
Summary of highlights
Social and ethics report of the Chairperson of the SSEC
President and Chief Executive Officer's statement
Relationship with the UNGC
Prioritising the SDGs
SUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST  
OUR FOCUS AREAS
Performance at a glance
Focus area: Safe and enduring operations
Occupational safety and HSI programme
Occupational health
Process safety
Human capital management
Human rights
Ethics
Enduring operations
Product stewardship
Product life cycle
Sustainable plastics
Focus area: Growing shared value – Sasol in society
Sasol in society
Access to quality education 
Community environmental programme
Bridge-to-work
Community health and service infrastructure programme
Sasol for good
Development sponsorships
Centre for shared value management
Responsible sourcing and procurement
Economic inclusion
Focus area: Resilience in a low-carbon future
Climate change
Energy efficiency
Focus area: Managing our environmental footprint
Environmental incident management
Air quality management
Water
Waste
Land and biodiversity
Environmental compliance
SHE and sustainability development (SHE&SD) data management 
and governance
DATA AND ASSURANCE
Performance data
Independent assurance practitioner’s assurance report
ANNEXURES
Forward-looking statement
Abbreviations

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

11

12
13
14
15
19
21
23
24
25
26

27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
37

40
41

42
43
46
49
50
52
54

56
63

64
64

Our suite of reports is informed by the following 
standards and initiatives. We have sought alignment 
with key reporting expectations as well as compliance 
with all relevant legal requirements. 

The International Integrated Reporting <IR> Framework 
South African Companies Act 71 of 2008, as amended
Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) Listings Requirements
King IV™ Report on Corporate Governance for South Africa, 2016 
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS)
Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) Sustainability Reporting Standards
Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD)
United Nations Advanced Reporting Criteria and Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs)
United States Securities and Exchange Commission  
rules and regulations
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
JSE Sustainability and Climate Disclosure Guidelines
Global tax regulations and principles

IR

IR

IR

IR

IR

SR

IR

SR

20-F

20-F

IR

TR

*

AFS

AFS

AFS

AFS

CCR

SR

CCR

20-F

CCR

SR

CCR

*  Financial data extracted from AFS and complies with IFRS

Sustainability reporting governance
Sustainability is core to our strategy and to how we operate our business. It is for this reason 
that the Sustainability and Reporting function, responsible for environmental, social and 
governance (ESG) disclosures, falls under Portfolio Strategy and Sustainability. It ultimately 
reports to the Executive Director and Executive Vice President Strategy, Sustainability and 
Integrated Services, who in turn reports on Sustainability and Reporting matters to the Safety 
Social and Ethics Committee (SSEC), a delegated Board Committee.
Director’s approval
The SSEC of the Sasol Limited Board of Directors (Board) is responsible for ensuring the 
integrity of Sasol’s sustainability reporting. We confirm that the FY23 Sustainability Report 
addresses all material issues and matters related to sustainability and fairly represents the 
Group’s sustainability performance. The SSEC, authorised by the Board, approved this report 
and its publication on 30 August 2023.

Signed on behalf of the SSEC: 

Muriel Dube
Chairperson of the SSEC

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

1

Our suite of reports

Integrated Report
Concise communication on 
Sasol’s strategy, governance, 
performance and outlook, and 
how these lead to the preservation 
and creation of value over the 
short, medium and long term.

Sustainability Report
Communication on Sasol’s 
sustainability journey reflective 
of our environmental, social and 
governance (ESG) performance.

Climate Change Report
Information on Sasol’s climate 
change risk management 
process, response and summary 
of work underway to address 
our climate change risks 
and opportunities.

Annual Financial Statements
A complete analysis of the 
Group’s financial results, 
with detailed financial 
statements including the 
Report of the Audit Committee.

Tax Report
Our approach to tax reporting 
including defining our tax 
principles and fulfilling our 
compliance and disclosure 
obligations globally in accordance 
with all relevant legislation.

Form 20-F
Our annual report filed with 
the United States Securities 
and Exchange Commission (SEC), 
pursuant to our New York Stock 
Exchange listing.

IR

SR

CCR

AFS

TR

20-F

Our 2023 suite of annual reports reflect the clear actions taken 
to deliver progress as well as the plans and prospects ahead.
WWW  These reports are available on our website,  
www.sasol.com or on request from Investor Relations.  
Contact details are on page 64 of this report.

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESIRSASOL LIMITEDINTEGRATED REPORTfor the year ended 30 June 2023Progressing a sustainable Future SasolSRSASOL LIMITEDSUSTAINABILITY REPORTfor the year ended 30 June 2023Progressing a sustainable Future SasolProgressing a sustainable Future SasolSASOL LIMITEDANNUAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTSfor the year ended 30 June 2023AFSProgressing a sustainable Future SasolSASOL LIMITEDTAX REPORTfor the year ended 30 June 2023TAXABOUT THIS REPORT

We adopt an integrated approach to reporting to better inform our stakeholders of the issues that affect our ability to preserve and create value. 
Our ability to progress Future Sasol is enabled by limiting value erosion over the short, medium and long term and effectively reporting on the triple 
bottom line of People, Planet and Profit.

Reporting boundary for the Sustainability Report (risks, opportunities and outcomes)

Financial reporting entity (control and significant influence)

SASOL

 MATERIAL MATTERS 
 Our material matters have the potential to help or hinder the delivery 
of our strategy, impacting our ability to deliver value over the short, medium 
and long term. Management of our material matters is underpinned by 
our People, Planet and Profit approach. Content linked to matters that 
affect our stakeholders is identified by the relevant icons throughout 
the report.

Subsidiaries

Joint ventures

Other investments

Our sustainability reporting approach

BOUNDARY

Report on primary activities of the Group, our subsidiaries, joint ventures and other investments 
where we have significant influence, financial and/or operational control. Sasol operates in both 
developing and developed countries, therefore some aspects in the report will not be applicable 
to all regions. This Sustainability Report is for the period 1 July 2022 to 30 June 2023. 

REPORTING 
FRAMEWORKS

Our reports are in accordance with national and international standards, codes and frameworks.
SR

 Refer to the previous page for the applicable reporting standards and framework for our suite of reports

This report intends to address the information needs of our stakeholders interested in Sasol’s 
overall sustainability performance. 

AUDIENCE AND KEY 
STAKEHOLDERS

Employees and 
organised labour

Shareholders and 
providers of capital

Customers

Communities 
and societies

Suppliers

Non-governmental 
organisations (NGOs)

Organised business 
and industry

Governments 
and regulators

Business/joint 
ventures (JVs) 

Media

Safety of 
our people

Resetting 
for resilience

Sustainably 
decarbonising 
for Future Sasol

Environmental 
stewardship

Strengthening 
relationships 

with stakeholders 

and regulators

  UNITED NATIONS (UN) 
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
GOALS (SDGs)
 We contribute to the UN Decade of 
Action through the UN SDGs, which are 
embedded in our strategy and Purpose. 
We have prioritised five SDGs which 
we directly contribute to while linking 
and indirectly contributing to the 
other 12 SDGs. Information related to 
the SDGs is indicated by the relevant 
icon in the report.

People

Planet

FUTURE
SASOL

Profit

 TEN PRINCIPLES OF THE UN GLOBAL COMPACT
 Sasol is a signatory to the UN Global Compact. We use the Ten Principles to 
develop and grow a sustainable Future Sasol. We have incorporated our progress 
in applying the Ten Principles into this report using the applicable icons. 

REPORT  
INTEGRITY

The Safety, Social and Ethics Committee delegated by the Board is responsible for ensuring the 
integrity of Sasol’s sustainability reporting.  SR

 Refer to page 1 for our Directors’ approval of this report

WWW  The UN Ten Principles can be viewed at: 
www.unglobalcompact.org/what-is-gc/mission/principles

Principles  

1 and 2

Principles  
3, 4, 5 and 6

Principles  
7, 8 and 9

Principle 10

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

2

 

 

 

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESProgressing a sustainable  
Future Sasol

Sasol is a global chemicals and energy company. We harness our 
knowledge and expertise to integrate sophisticated technologies and 
processes into world-scale operating facilities.
We strive to safely and sustainably source, produce and market a range 
of high-quality products globally.
Our strategy established a clear path along three horizons. We have 
to RESET our business enabling us to TRANSITION and to ultimately 
REINVENT ourselves into a more sustainable company. During the year 
we faced several headwinds and we now have to redouble our efforts 
to deliver on the RESET phase to ensure that we are able to fund our 
TRANSITION and REINVENTION.
Our focus on the activities and initiatives during the RESET is immediate 
and this will not be an easy path. 

WWW
www.sasol.com

IR

 For more detail refer to our Integrated Report on page 15 -18, available on our website, 

Our Values guide and enable us to embed sustainability through our ESG 
disclosures and reporting practices on a continuous basis. 
Our Values

FUTURE 
SASOL

OUR 
AMBITION

We are resetting, transitioning and reinventing Sasol to achieve
our net zero* greenhouse gas emissions ambition by 2050

  We always place the safety of people first 

Grow shared value while accelerating our transition to net zero*

  We care deeply for our people, planet and our communities

  BE SAFE

 

 BE CARING

  BE INCLUSIVE

OUR SUSTAINABILITY  
STATEMENT

Advancing chemical and energy solutions that 
contribute to a thriving planet, society and enterprise

*  Net zero for Sasol is to significantly reduce emissions to the point where only hard-to-abate emissions 

remain or are zero. Any residual emissions will be neutralised using carbon dioxide removal offsets.

 

 We foster inclusivity in all we do, our employees, our customers 
and stakeholders

  BE ACCOUNTABLE
  We own our results

  BE RESILIENT

  We boldly adapt to change and embrace agility

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023
SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

3
3

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESWHAT SUSTAINABILITY MEANS FOR SASOL

Our sustainability approach
Our sustainability approach is holistic, where environmental, social and economic aspects are integrated, balanced and prioritised according to our material matters. 
Sasol applies the three pillars of sustainability (People, Planet and Profit) in our strategy and business activities. 

Sustainable development is the process whereby the needs of the present generation are met without compromising future generations’ ability to meet their own 
needs. We understand that this process requires accountability. Sasol, therefore, adopts an integrated management approach to facilitate effective decision-making 
that will ensure long-term continuity/sustainability for the company.

Our prioritised Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs)
Our four sustainability focus areas together with our 
material matters are closely linked to the SDGs that 
we prioritised, as we believe we can constructively 
contribute to these.

PEOPLE 

PLANET 

PROFIT

Safe and enduring operations

 

I

L
A
R
E
T
A
M

S
R
E
T
T
A
M

S
T
C
E
P
S
A

Health and safety

Air quality

Capital allocation

Employee value proposition

Water stewardship

Value-based growth

Ethics, business  
and human rights

Waste management  

and biodiversity

Communities and stakeholders

Climate change

Asset reviews

Continuous improvement

ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL AND GOVERNANCE 

SDG 8: 
Decent work and economic growth

Enhancing safe and enduring operations 
is critical to value preservation and creation 
in order to deliver on our strategy

SDG 9: 
Industry, innovation and infrastructure

Building resilient infrastructure, promoting 
sustainable industries and fostering innovation

Minimising our environmental footprint

SDG 12: 
Responsible consumption and production

Remaining committed to minimising 
the impact of our operations on the environment

Resilience in a low-carbon future

SDG 13: 
Climate action

Accelerating our decarbonisation and 
transformational changes through partnerships, 
technology and innovation

Growing shared value

SDG 17: 
Partnerships for the goals

Working to create positive and measurable  
socio-economic impacts and responding to 
key societal challenges

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

4

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESOUR JOURNEY // 33 YEARS OF SUSTAINABILITY REPORTING

1990 – 1996

 ▪ First Sasol Environmental report

 ▪ Responsible Care® signatory

 ▪ Sasol commenced sponsorship of the Osizweni   

Science Centre  

1997 – 2000

 ▪ First global SHE Policy adopted

 ▪ SHE Centre established

2010 – 2011

 ▪ Implemented sustainable development materiality process    

 ▪ Terminated coal-to-liquids growth options  

 ▪ invested R184 million in community development  

2012 – 2014

 ▪ Integrated Reporting aligned with Integrated Reporting 

Framework and King IVTM  

 ▪ Commenced sponsorship of Solar Challenge    

 ▪ Sustainable development committed as strategic priority

2001 – 2002

 ▪ Signatory to UN Global Compact and committed to  

the UN Ten Principles  

 ▪ Launched HIV/Aids Programme

2015 – 2017

 ▪ Joined EP100   

 ▪ Voluntarily participated in the South African 

carbon budget process 

 ▪ Adopted greenhouse gas (GHG) reporting in terms of GHG protocol

 ▪ Supported the South African Government to sign the Paris Agreement  

2003 – 2005

 ▪ Safety included as a Value  

 ▪ Adopted GRI and annual sustainability reporting

 ▪ Signed the Energy Accord  

2018 – 2019

 ▪ Set four sustainability focus areas, linked to prioritised 

SDGs and organisational risk aspects  

 ▪ Incorporated Taskforce on Climate related Financial Disclosure and 

released our first Climate Change Report  

 ▪ Delivered fit-for-purpose wellbeing solutions for employees  

2006 – 2008

 ▪ Endorsed UN Global Compact CEO Water Mandate

 ▪ Participated voluntarily 

in Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP)

 ▪ Sasol Foundation established  

2020 – 2021

 ▪ 2030 climate change targets and 2050 net zero ambition approved    

 ▪ ESG ambition to be included in Dow Jones Sustainability Index    
 ▪ Established the just transition office and Centre for Shared value 

Management  

 ▪ Signatory of Operation Clean Sweep®    

2023

 ▪ Sasol Eurasia Chemicals  

business EcoVadis certified

 ▪ Sasol Energy Water policy 

approved

 ▪ Completion of the Biodiversity 

footprint assessment

 ▪ First green hydrogen produced 

end of June 2023

 ▪ Sasol Place achieves a level 4 
Green star rating for existing 
building performance

2009 – 2010

 ▪ Water disclosure in CDP reporting

 ▪ Gas turbines and engines increased own  

electricity generation

2022

 ▪ Sasol Chemicals Business recognised for providing innovative products that 

enable more environmentally-friendly formulations    

 ▪ Achievement of International Sustainability and Carbon 

Certification PLUS certification  

 ▪ Commenced sponsorship of women’s football  

 ▪ Sasolburg Operations Green Drop Certified  

SUPPORT TO OTHER 
INITIATIVES:

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

5

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESSUMMARY OF HIGHLIGHTS

Construction of the Msenge Emoyeni 
Wind Farm (69MW) commences 

Sasol certified ‘Top employer’ for the 
eighth consecutive year in South Africa

Commissioned approximately 3MW solar 
energy in Sasolburg and commenced 
production of green hydrogen end June 2023

The Siyakha Funding Initiative 
created 859 jobs and sustained 
2 050 jobs

Increased DJSI score from 54 to 62 in 2022 review

A- score for CDP climate disclosure

Completed our Biodiversity 
Footprint Assessment

Sasol’s enabling role in women’s football contributed 
to Banyana Banyana, the South African women’s 
team being crowned as the African Champions at 
the 2022 Women’s Africa Cup of Nations

Came top of our sector for the second 
year in a row for transparent disclosure 
as undertaken by Integrated Reporting 
Assurance Services

Developed and published the 
Sasol Energy Water Policy

Won the International Association 
of Energy Engineers, Sub-Saharan 
award for ‘Industrial Corporate 
Company of the Year 2023’

Won the 2022 CAIA Responsible 
Care Water Award

Won the South African Energy 
Efficiency Confederation award for 
‘Industrial Corporate Company 
of the Year 2022’

Sasol Place achieved a 5-star design rating 
of the building and a level 4 Green Star rating 
for the existing building performance from the 
Green Building Council of South Africa

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

6

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESSOCIAL AND ETHICS REPORT OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SSEC

   As we are resetting, we remain firmly on 
our path to becoming more sustainable. 

KEY MESSAGES

   Focus on safety remains paramount 
  Progressing our ESG ambition
   Top of our sector second year in a 
row for sustainability disclosures
   Fully committed to the Principles of 
the United Nations Global Compact

Muriel Dube //  
Chairperson of the Safety, Social and Ethics Committee (SSEC)

As we reset our unmatched Fischer-Tropsch technology, considerable 
human and intellectual capital is an important bedrock for our further 
progress in executing actions to support a just transition as part of 
our overall sustainability journey.

Dear stakeholders
Implementing credible actions towards a 
platform that will facilitate the fulfilment of 
our decarbonisation targets including further 
development of our thinking towards a just 
transition, was foremost in 2023. Overall, Sasol 
continued to progress a more holistic approach to 
sustainability, moving beyond a predominant focus 
on addressing climate change. We undertook our 
first Biodiversity Footprint Assessment at both 
Secunda and Sasolburg and tracked our progress 
against the short-term water targets set last year. 
These actions contributed to our improved 
environmental, social and governance (ESG) ratings 
and inclusion in the Dow Jones Sustainability 
Index (DJSI).

Committed to Zero Harm
The tragic and unacceptable loss of two of our 
colleagues in work related fatalities points to a 
deeply concerning deficiency in our attainment of 
Zero Harm. The Safety, Social and Ethics Committee 
(SSEC) further intensified efforts, through 
management, to improve overall safety through the 
‘humanising safety’ initiative aimed at ensuring that 
each Sasol team member always performs a task 
with safety in mind. While this yielded some gains, 
it clearly requires a more diligent implementation 
approach. The CEO and executive management’s 
commitment to keep driving the correct safety 
culture and behaviour, remains paramount.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

7

Progressing our ESG ambition
In recognition of our continued improvement in 
transparency of non-financial disclosures, Integrated 
Reporting & Assurance Services in South Africa 
announced Sasol as being the top of our sector for 
sustainability disclosures. Similarly, our biodiversity 
disclosures were ranked seventh out of 294 JSE-listed 
companies and state-owned enterprises in the latest 
Biodiversity Disclosure Report released in June 2023. 
Despite this strong showing, we acknowledge the 
considerable task to ensure a more positive impact 
on biodiversity. We also increased our DJSI score from 
54 to 62 and remain on track for further 
improvements in the years to come. 

The Ten Principles and the Sustainable 
Development Goals
We continue to measure our contribution to our 
prioritised Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
and, in that way, support the United Nations Decade 
of Action. Globally, rapidly evolving operating 
contexts are impacting strategies with increased 
necessity for unparalleled agility. We have grasped 
this as an opportunity to foster an innovative 
mindset as an essential part of advancing our 
contribution in the respective SDGs as we move the 
company along an unprecedented decarbonisation 
journey. As we reset, our unmatched FT technology, 
considerable human and intellectual capital is an 
important bedrock for our further progress in 
executing actions to support a just transition as part 
of our overall sustainability journey. 

Global sustainability reporting standards
Several new international sustainability reporting 
standards will become applicable to our business in 
the near future. These include, but are not limited to, 
the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive 
and its rules known as the European Sustainability 
Reporting Standards; the United States Securities 
Exchange Commission Rules; and the rules of the 
International Sustainability Standards Board. 
Ensuring compliance will require thoughtful 
integration into current processes with the goal of 
enhancing and improving disclosure. It is for this 
reason that we established a working group focused 
on this integration. 

In our continuous efforts to drive a holistic 
sustainability approach, Sasol acknowledges the 
landmark decision taken at the fifth session of the 
UN Environmental Assembly (UNEA 5.2) to develop 
an internationally legally binding instrument (ILBI) 
to end plastic pollution. We recognise that plastic 
pollution is a global problem and is best addressed 
by utilising a coordinated and globally aligned 
response. Additionally, we note that the business 
community will play an integral role in the 
implementation of the ILBI objectives and as a result, 
we are working closely with industry bodies and 
other stakeholders to contribute to the 
Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (INC) 
regarding the development of the Treaty by the end 
of 2024.

Targeting gender equality
In furthering gender equality, we included measures 
to track pay equity as part of a 10-point plan to 
achieve our diversity objectives in the year under 
review. It is encouraging that we increased the 
representation of African and Coloured women 
across all role categories in South Africa as well as 
their inclusion in succession plans for senior 
leadership and in critical roles. Our women networks 
such as the 'Women in Operations' and 'Women in 
Mining' supported efforts to ensure diversity, equity, 
inclusion and belonging throughout Sasol.

In closing
Reflecting on progress in 2023, the company’s 
sustainability journey is ever maturing. Having 
successfully undertaken several initiatives during a 
very trying period is testament to the commitment of 
Sasol’s people. I am confident that the SSEC fulfilled 
its mandate as required by the Companies Act 71 of 
2008 and that there were no instances of material 
non-compliance with applicable ESG laws and 
regulations. My sincerest appreciation to Team Sasol, 
including Board colleagues for their commitment to 
advancing the company’s sustainability efforts. Our 
stakeholder engagement remains a vital input to our 
work and our sustainability journey.

Muriel Dube
Chairperson of the SSEC
30 August 2023

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESIn the year, we applied to the National Air Quality 
Officer to be regulated in terms of this solution. 
On 11 July 2023, we were informed that the application 
had been refused. As provided for in Section 43(1) 
of the National Environmental Management Act, 107 
of 1998, we submitted an appeal to the Minister of 
Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment and await an 
outcome. We remain confident of our position and 
that it will be to greater benefit of South Africa.

Looking forward
While much still needs to be done, I am inspired by 
the efforts of Sasol people who – in the face of many 
uncertainties – continue to make progress on various 
fronts of sustainability. These uncertainties will be 
with us into the new financial year and possibly 
beyond, but I am confident that all our people will 
undertake their efforts with the same commitment, 
passion and vigour, knowing that we are progressing 
Sasol on its sustainability journey.

Fleetwood Grobler
President and Chief Executive Officer
30 August 2023

PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER'S STATEMENT

   Our approach to sustainability is all inclusive, 
embracing the collective and valuing partnerships. 

KEY MESSAGES

   Safety remains a focus area
   Progressing sustainability 
initiatives beyond climate change
   Strengthening collaboration 
with the UNGC
   Embedding SDGs

Fleetwood Grobler // President and Chief Executive Officer 

In the face of uncertainty, we have continued to make progress 
towards becoming more sustainable.

Dear stakeholders
Heightened global geopolitical and macroeconomic 
uncertainty is not just redesigning the way we do 
business, but also how and with whom we do 
business. This guides us towards a sustainability 
approach that is all inclusive, embracing the collective 
and valuing partnerships. This holistic approach not 
only impacts positively on our decarbonisation, 
biodiversity and water journeys’ but also our 
communities.

Safety
In 2023, Zero Harm remained elusive, with the tragic 
loss of two colleagues while on duty. I wish to again 
convey our sincere condolences to the family, friends 
and colleagues of Mr Kgauta Mahlaba and 
Mr Stiffi Ndlovu. The safety of our people is not only 
a material matter for Sasol, but the pursuit of Zero 
Harm remains one of our Group top priorities as we 
focus on the ‘Reset’ phase of our strategy to build a 
resilient company. Undertaking our ‘Reset’ will be of 
little value if we compromise the safety of our people: 
further entrenching our ‘humanising safety’ initiative, 
caring for ourselves and for others, is indeed 
paramount.

Going beyond climate change
In FY23, we made progress on our decarbonisation 
journey and lowered our emissions by 3,5 million tons 
against our 2017 baseline. However, this reduction was 
mostly the result of operational challenges and varying 
feedstock supply with lower production volumes. 
As these production challenges are addressed, so 
emissions will increase in the year ahead. 

Appreciating the interconnectedness of water use 
and biodiversity with climate change, in FY22 we set 
short-term water targets and in FY23 undertook 
biodiversity footprint assessments at our Secunda 
and Sasolburg facilities. While we have made some 
progress on our water targets, we realise that we 
have to intensify our efforts with regard to fresh and 
potable water usage at Sasolburg Ekandustria 
Operations. As regards biodiversity, we have just 
received the results of the assessments and are 
analysing these for a better understanding of both 
our positive and negative impacts. While still in its 
infancy, in FY23 we progressed our own baseline 
understanding of circularity within Sasol.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

8

The United Nations Global Compact (UNGC)
As a committed member of the UNGC, Sasol continued 
to foster a strong relationship by actively participating 
in the body’s events and initiatives, including those 
related to the SDG accelerators. This participation 
enhanced our understanding of SDGs and contributed 
to their further embedment in our business. We closely 
monitored our contribution to our prioritised SDGs – 
8, 9, 12, 13 and 17 – believing that these are the areas 
in which we can play the most constructive role. 
In further building our relationship, we participated in 
a joint ‘UNGC and Sasol day’ to exchange ideas on how 
to build on the already strong foundation of 
collaboration. 

Promise to society
In delivering our ‘Promise to society’, which is to be 
a catalyst for positive change, we at Sasol have 
undertaken several notable initiatives over the years 
that continued to pay dividends to our communities in 
FY23. South African women’s football stars Banyana 
Banyana whom Sasol has sponsored since 2009, were 
crowned African Champions in Morocco, showing that 
they truly can #Live the Impossible thanks to the 
shared belief in the potential of women’s football.  
At the recent women's soccer world cup they 
progressed to the last 16 team playoffs. 

We continued investing in quality education and 
driving excellence in science, technology, engineering 
and mathematics education. As examples, in South 
Africa this saw more than 4 800 learners from 
61 schools participate in the Sasol Energy Innovation 
Schools Challenge; in North America, we engaged more 
than 500 grade 2 – 5 students in 20 classrooms 
through the Chemical Education Foundation; and in 
Mozambique, we provided 1 200 science kits with 
essential supplies to learners at the Temane and 
Mangungumete Primary Schools. 

Air quality
We remained committed to complying with legislative 
requirements for air quality, as well as being supportive 
of government’s policy and regulatory endeavours to 
improve air quality. In the year, we continued to 
voluntarily engage with government, society and 
advisory bodies. To date, we have achieved 98% 
compliance with the Minimum Emission Standards.  
The outstanding challenge relates to achieving the 
concentration-based limit for sulphur dioxide from the 
boilers at Secunda Operations. However, we have a 
solution that considers an alternative emission load.  

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESRELATIONSHIP WITH THE UNITED NATIONS GLOBAL COMPACT

OUR COMMITMENT 
“ We have been a member of the 
United Nations Global Compact 
(UNGC) since 2001 and are 
committed to embedding the 
Ten Principles into our strategies, 
policies and procedures. We also 
submit our Communication on 
Progress (CoP) to the UNGC 
together with our CEO’s statement 
of continued support further 
solidifying our position as an ethical 
and responsible corporate citizen.”

Our approach
We have applied the advanced-level reporting criteria 
of the UNGC, meeting the 21 advanced criteria as 
part of our reporting frameworks. As part of our 
commitment to advancing water management, we 
are a signatory to the UN Global Compact CEO Water 
Mandate and have adopted the Mandate’s Water 
Stewardship Framework in responding to water risks. 
Several Sasol policies and procedures have been 
developed and implemented in keeping with our 
commitment to the Ten Principles of the UNGC.

These include but are not limited to:

•  Code of Conduct
•  Human Rights Policy
•  Human Rights Framework
•  Supplier Code of Conduct
•  Security Policy
•  Safety, Health and Environment (SHE) Policy
•  Anti-Bribery Policy
•  Gifts, Entertainment and Hospitality Policy
•  Whistleblowing Policy

Our CEO is a founding member of the African Business 
Leadership Coalition (ABLC). The Coalition is part of 
the UN Global Compact Africa Strategy and provides 
a platform for the private sector to champion 
sustainable development. We participate in a number 
of SDG accelerators that are designed to expedite 
progress toward the SDGs by 2030.

These collaborative platforms bring together various 
stakeholders to drive innovation, create partnerships 
and implement effective solutions. By gaining access 
to peers, technical experts and mentors, sustainable 
solutions across sectors and regions are promoted.
WWW  For more detail refer our website, www.sasol.com

Participation in the 
accelerator programmes
Sasol is currently participating in several accelerator 
programmes, namely:
1.  SDG ambition 
2.  Business and Human Rights
3.  Climate Ambition
4.  SDG Innovation Accelerator for Young 

Professionals

5.  Target Gender Equality

Sasol and UNGC Day
In July 2023, the Global Compact Network South 
Africa (GCNSA) led by the Executive Director, 
Dr Achieng Ojwang joined Sasol at our headquarters 
in Johannesburg for a collaboration session with the 
Group Executive Committee (GEC) and members of 
the Business team. The sessions focused on thought 
leadership and enablement to embed the shared 
values and principles of the UNGC. The GCNSA 
provided insights on Global Compact Gap Analysis 
Tools, the availability of Think Labs, Coalition 
opportunities and the value of the Accelerator 
programmes which Sasol is currently participating in. 
Our GEC reaffirmed our commitment to the Ten 
Principles as well as promoting gender parity and 
providing equal opportunity to all. The teams also 
accompanied artist, Patrick Rulore, winner of Sasol 
New Signatures 2019, as he showcased his new 
‘Stage 4 Moments’ collection.

FEATURE STORY

ABLC ROUNDTABLE 
DISCUSSIONS AND RELEASE OF 
THE CLIMATE STATEMENT
Our CEO together with experts 
supporting sustainability at Sasol 
participated in the Johannesburg 
regional roundtable held in 
August 2022. The contributions were 
considered as part of the ABLC Climate 
statement that was accepted at COP27 
in Egypt. Mindful that the African 
continent has special circumstances 
that require a common but 
differentiated approach, Sasol supports 
the commitments in the climate 
statement by upholding the Ten 
Principles, improving adaptive capacity 
and upholding the guiding principles 
of a just transition. We are continuously 
pursuing viable opportunities to 
increase the share of renewables in our 
energy mix. Our continuous efforts to 
form partnerships globally enable us to 
exchange knowledge with our partners, 
further facilitating the achievement 
of our decarbonisation targets.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

9

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESPRIORITISING THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS (SDGs)

Our five prioritised SDGs are aligned with our business and strategic priorities. We recognise that by focusing on these, 
we are also able to have a real and measurable impact on other SDGs. To further enhance our contribution to our five 
prioritised SDGs, we have identified the relevant sub-goals against which we enable an overall improvement in our 
sustainability performance. Currently, we are also finding ways of adopting the 10 SDG ambition benchmarks that 
facilitate the setting of ambitious targets to deliver on the SDGs by 2030.

People

Planet

FUTURE
SASOL

Profit

PRIORITISED 
SDGs

IMPACT ON 
OTHER SDGs

INFORMING 
MATERIAL  
MATTERS

SDG  
SUB-GOALS* 
MEASURING

OUR 
CONTRIBUTION

1, 4, 10, 11

3, 4, 6, 8, 11

3, 11, 13, 17

3, 7, 8, 17

4, 7, 8, 11, 13

8.1 

 Contribution to the economies 
where we operate

8.2   Levels of economic productivity 

and innovation

8.3  Job creation and just transition
8.4  Resource efficiency
8.5    Inclusive and productive 

employment

8.6   Youth employment, 

education and training

8.8   Safe and secure working 

environments

9.4     Infrastructure and 

sustainable industries

9.5  Enhance scientific research 

9a 

and development
 Facilitate sustainable and resilient 
infrastructure development 
in developing countries

9b  Support domestic technology 

development, research and innovation 
in developing countries

12.1   Implement the 10-year framework of programmes 

on sustainable consumption and production

12.2  By 2030, achieve the sustainable management 

and efficient use of natural resources

12.4  Environmentally sound management of chemicals 
and all waste and significantly reduce their release 
to air, water and soil

12.5  By 2030, substantially reduce waste generation 

through prevention, reduction, recycling and reuse

12.6 Sustainability reporting
12.8 Sustainability information and awareness
12a  Scientific and technological capacity to move 

towards more sustainable patterns of 
consumption and production

13.1   Strengthen resilience and adaptive 
capacity to climate-related hazards 
and natural disasters in all countries
13.2  Integrate climate change measures 

into national policies, strategies 
and planning

13.3  Improve education, awareness-raising 
and human and institutional capacity 
on climate change mitigation, 
adaptation, impact reduction and early 
warning

13a  Operationalise the Green Climate Fund
13b   Climate change-related planning 

and management

17.1    Finance – Strengthen 10.05 

Domestic resource mobilisation

17.3   Finance – Mobilise additional 

financial resources for developing 
countries from multiple sources

17.9  Capacity building – Implementation of 
all the sustainable development goals

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Committed to Zero Harm and 
adherence to the life saving rules.
Eliminating high severity incidents 
through the updated SHE incident 
management procedure.
R35 billion in wages and benefits 
that contribute to economies in 
which we operate. 
Application of human rights due 
diligence into our mergers and 
acquistions handbook.
Training was provided in FY23 to 319 
suppliers registered to do business 
with Sasol in South Africa and 
Mozambique.
Invested R73,81 million in bursaries 
and graduate development enabling 
future talent retention.

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Repairs of water and sanitation 
infrastructure in KwaZulu-Natal 
schools impacted by floods. 
Transformed 12 illegal dumpsites 
into food gardens in Metsimaholo 
Municipality.
Supporting and collaborating with 
local government for infrastructure 
improvements that impact 
marginalised communities.
Key access road rehabilitation (8.8km) 
enhancing economic activities and 
creating employment for 77 people.
Implementation of the 1HR system 
to drive functional effectiveness and 
competitive advantage.
Participation in the UN Global 
Compact young SDG innovators 
programmes.

• 

•  We support and advocate for sustainability 
disclosure against best practice standards.
The launch of 15 units and creation of more than 70 
direct jobs as part of the Packa-ching programme.
Sasolburg Ekandustria operations continued 
with its landfill avoidance drive, with 46% of its 
hazardous waste recycled in 2023.

• 

• 

•  Our value chain is free of any materials relating 
to the multilateral environmental agreements 
on chemicals under the Montreal Protocol or the 
Stockholm Convention.
An improvement of 17,6% from FY22 was noted 
on our electrostatic precipitators at Secunda 
Operations to enable PM reduction.
Advancing our Air Quality journey and are already 
compliant to 98% of point source emissions with 
approximately R7 billion spend in the last five years.

• 

•  Our 2050 net zero ambition supports 

•  Advancing the sustainability agenda 

• 

• 

• 

the latest climate science, with 
our 2030 targets being well below 
2°C-aligned.
Sasol has achieved an approximate 
5% and 3.5 MtCO2e reduction when 
compared to our 2017 baseline.
Developed a just transition roadmap 
with prioritised interventions focusing 
on affected workers and communities.
To date, we have signed six power 
purchase agreements totalling 
>600MW that will enable the 
integration of renewable energy into 
our decarbonisation strategy.

through ongoing engagement 
and participation with regulators, 
governments and industry trade 
associations.

•  German-South African research 
programme to develop the next-
generation of cobalt Fischer-Tropsch 
catalysts specifically for the production 
of sustainable aviation fuels.

•  Partnering with Universities and 

Technical and Vocational Education 
Training colleges to create a pipeline of 
skilled labour.

•  We have committed to a R250 billion 
public private localisation partnership 
over the next five years in South Africa 
to enhance economic transformation.

*Sub-goals as referred to in the global SDG indicator framework

WWW  For tracking against other SDGs refer to our website, www.sasol.com/index.php/investor-centre/sustainability-reporting

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

10

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESPERFORMANCE AT A GLANCE

FOCUS AREAS

SAFE AND  

ENDURING OPERATIONS

GROWING  

SHARED VALUE

RESILIENCE IN A  

LOW-CARBON FUTURE

MANAGING OUR  

ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT

 

I

L
A
R
E
T
A
M

R
E
T
T
A
M

N
O
I
T
C
E
S
S
H
T
N

I

 

 

I

S
R
E
D
L
O
H
E
K
A
T
S

E
C
N
A
M
R
O
F
R
E
P

Safety of 
our people

Resetting 
for resilience

Strengthening relationships 

with stakeholders and regulators

Sustainably decarbonising 

for Future Sasol

Environmental 
stewardship

     Occupational safety and HSI programme
   Human capital: Labour management
   Occupational health
   Human rights
   Ethics
   Process safety
   Enduring operations
   Product stewardship
   Sustainable use of plastics

     Centre for Shared Value Management
     Social impact focus areas
     Community environmental programmes
     Access to quality education
     Bridge-to-work: Skills development
    Community health and infrastructure
     Sasol for Good
     Development sponsorships
     Responsible sourcing and procurement
     Economic inclusion

     Climate change
     Energy efficiency

     Environmental incident management
     Air quality management
     Water management
     Waste management
     Land and biodiversity
     Environmental compliance

Employees and 
organised labour

Customers

Suppliers

Communities 
and societies

Communities 
and societies

Shareholders and 
providers of capital

Communities 
and societies

Non-governmental 
organisations (NGOs)

Governments 
and regulators

Governments 
and regulators

Fatalities 2

Recordable case rate (RCR) 0,27

Employee turnover  

1 725

Major and significant fires,  
explosions and releases 15

THE SDGs WE CONTRIBUTED TO

Social investment spend R857,3 million

Black-owned spend R41,7 billion

Black women-owned spend 

R28,5 million

Achieved 13,4% energy efficiency 

improvement in FY23 relative to 18,4% in FY22

Achieved 10,6% energy efficiency 

improvement in FY23, for Sasol South Africa 

relative to 15,7% in FY22 

Achieved approximately 5%¹ GHG reduction 

from 2017 combined baseline

1    For combined Sasol Energy and Chemicals baseline and largely 

due to lower production and operational issues

Total water use decreased  

by 13,9% from FY222

Recycled waste increased 

by 5,34% from FY22

Total non-hazardous waste decreased 

by 7,2% from FY22

2   The decrease in total water use by SO is largely attributed to an 
improved river water quality following favorable rains resulting 
in less water use per volumes of steam generated

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

11

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONS // Occupational safety and HSI programme

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
Sasol commits to the following:
• Humanising Safety initiatives that focus on showing care 
through every layer of influence across the organisation. 

• Eliminating fatalities by embedding our High Severity Incident 

(HSI) Programme. 

OUR GROUP 
APPROACH

The safety of our people is not just a material matter for Sasol but also 
one of our Group top priorities. We continuously strive for Zero Harm 
and our approach centres on:

    Understanding our risk landscape and managing our activities in a way that eliminates incidents, 
minimises risk and promotes excellence in the performance of our operations; and
   Leveraging our risk-based approach to managing our Top SHE Risks (Key Undesirable Events), 
while strengthening our combined SHE assurance processes.

PERFORMANCE

TARGETS

Zero

fatalities

RCR of

0,26

Lost workday case 
rate (LWDCR) of

HSI severity  
rate (HSI-SR)* of

0,11

12

GROUP 

PERFORMANCE

Two

(2022: Five)

0,27  

(2022: 0,27)

0,13 

(2022: 0,10)

9,96 

(2022: 16,00)

Note: Numbers in brackets refer to the previous year
*  Assured by Deloitte & Touche/Tholisiwe –  SR

 refer to page 63

The Group targets remained the same apart from a downward adjustment of the LWDCR. There was one fatality in our 
Mining business and another fatality at the Polypropylene Bagging Warehouse both in Secunda. The Recordable Case 
Rate in FY23 is on par with FY22, while the LWDCR is marginally higher. The HSI-SR showed a marked improvement from 
FY22 actual and was well below the target. The improved HSI-SR is attributable to the continued focus on the HSI 
programme, which aims at fundamentally preventing high-severity incidents.

At Sasol, we undertake the following:

•  Leadership engaging and committing to encourage core safety behaviours;
•  Humanising safety through showing care for ourselves, others and our service providers; 
•  Creating awareness of the risks in our areas of accountability and the processes that are in place to control 

•  Keeping individuals and teams connected, in the moment and supporting each other, whether working from home 

these risks;

or located at any of our facilities;

•  Inclusion and consideration of human factors in incident investigation and process safety management; and
•  Developing fit-for-purpose Leading Indicator monitoring and reporting as a predictive lever to manage SHE.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

12

FY23 OUTCOMES
Fit-for-purpose Leading Indicators anchored on our HSI Programme.

Significant process with critical SHE systems.

Strengthening collaboration and leveraging learning opportunities.

Enabling a caring environment through constructive employee dialogue.

Focused training interventions on improving our capabilities.

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONSSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONS // Occupational health 

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
Sasol follows an integrated risk approach to managing occupational health 
and wellbeing, where leading best practices inform our continuous improvement 
of occupational health performance towards our goal of Zero Harm.

OUR GROUP 
APPROACH

Our occupational health approach, founded on governance framework requirements 
for occupational health and wellbeing services, delivered by capable healthcare 
professionals, includes:
    Management of exposure to physical, chemical, biological and ergonomic factors;
    Prevention of occupational diseases and injuries; and
    Promotion of health and workability, rehabilitation and return to work as well as 
emergency response and curative services.

TARGETED INTERVENTIONS

PERFORMANCE

Our businesses implement their occupational health services according to the following functional areas:

OCCUPATIONAL MEDICINE 

OCCUPATIONAL HYGIENE 

Preventing and managing occupational and 
work-aggravated as well as lifestyle diseases 
through medical surveillance programmes, 
primary health care, injury-on-duty 
management and rehabilitation and 
return-to-work programmes.

Identifying occupational health hazards 
and advising on the implementation of 
preventative controls and work practices to 
eliminate and/or mitigate exposures in the 
workplace.

Statutory reported occupational diseases
Occupational diseases incident rate
Incidents of work-related noise-induced hearing loss
Mining occupational diseases
Irreversible lung disease

2023

51
0.064
17
28
15

2022

38
0.052
23
28
8

Increase

Decrease

No change

INTEGRATION WITH EMPLOYEE WELLBEING 

ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH 

Enabling a holistic approach to health 
and wellbeing of our employee and the 
employees of service providers.

Communicating and raising awareness on 
the health impacts of Sasol operations 
within the surrounding communities.

SERVICE PROVIDER HEALTH DELIVERY 

MEDICAL EMERGENCY RESPONSE 

Following an aligned approach to that of 
Sasol for the employees of service providers.

Facilitating a standardised approach to 
responding in medical emergencies.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

13

In FY23, a marginal increase in occupational diseases were reported. Exposure to workplace noise was 
the health risk associated with the most occupational diseases reported. 

Our hearing conversation programme, following industry best practices, allows for the identification of 
early, non reportable, hearing loss due to workplace noise exposure. Relevant investigation to determine 
the cause is conducted and mitigating factors, including the inspection and checking of hearing protection, 
removal of noise exposure and retraining on noise exposure are implemented. While being aware of the 
latency factor between risk exposure and the onset of disease, we are confident that the benefit of 
effective health risk exposure management with continuous improvement on engineering, administrative 
and personal protective equipment controls will reflect in later reporting periods.

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONSSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONS // Process safety

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
Our commitment is to ensure that we maintain 
reliable, safe and sustainable operations.

OUR GROUP APPROACH

Through the application of the process safety management (PSM) system, we address process hazards, process knowledge, process 
safety risk management, process safety performance and learning through experiences, thereby striving for Zero Harm. Process 
safety integrity is enabled through adhering to inherent safe design, asset management and operations discipline as guided by 
international best practice to maintain reliable and safe operations.

   Monitoring and reporting of leading indicators for process safety.
  Decreased fire, explosion and release rate against target.

PERFORMANCE

TARGETS

GROUP 

PERFORMANCE

Fires, explosions 

and releases severity 

rate (FER-SR)*

4,5 

(2022: 3,8)

actions;

6,2

Process safety 
incidents less 
than or equal to

18

15  

(2022: 13)

Note: Numbers in brackets refer to the previous year
*  Assured by Deloitte & Touche/Tholisiwe –  SR

 refer to page 63

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

14

In FY22, Sasol had a good process safety performance, and in FY23 there was a slight increase 
in numbers which is an indication of stabilisation that is required for our processes. Our safety 
incidents consists of major and significant incidents. We had 15 process safety incidents, 
below the target of 18. 

We are continuing to implement and monitor the fifth high severity incidents (HSI) focus area 
(loss of primary containment) across the operations. All process safety fundamentals have 
been rolled out and we are monitoring the usage of assurance checklists associated with the 
process safety fundamentals.

To enable continuous improvement, our PSM priorities include:

•  Improving the quality of process safety risk studies and ensuring effective closure of 

•  Revising the permit to work system to improve controls related to maintenance activities;

•  Providing PSM training for frontline personnel;

•  Focusing on incident recall to ensure that the learnings have been effectively implemented;

•  Improving the quality of the critical control performance criteria;

•  Continuing to focus on the implementation of the Management of Change process to 

mitigate SHE risks related to personnel changes;

•  Auditing the status of PSM implementation to identify the areas of improvement;

•  Performing thorough analyses of the incident root causes and precursors, implementing 

measures to prevent the recurrence of incidents; and

•  Monitoring process safety leading and lagging indicators to identify and address 

weaknesses in the controls.

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONSSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONS // Human Capital Management

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
Our People Promise is to provide a unique employee experience and a 
compelling value proposition to a diverse workforce in a safe and inclusive 
workplace. This contributes to ensuring that our employees are aligned and 
committed to Sasol’s Strategy.

OUR GROUP APPROACH

ANCHOR

PURPOSE

PERFORMANCE

LEADERSHIP CAPABILITY DEVELOPMENT

As we transition towards Future Sasol, our leaders 
set the tone from the top and play a pivotal role 
in enabling a shift to a more customer-centric, 
caring and inclusive culture. The behaviour of our 
leadership enables agile ways of working, driving 
an owners’ mindset and creating a sense of 
belonging and care. To develop inspiring and caring 
leaders who create inclusive, innovative and 
high-performing work environments in FY23, we:

•  Launched our ‘Investing in the Sasol Leader 
of the Future’ programme, partnering with 
Global experts to define the Sasol Leadership 
Capabilities that are required to deliver on our 
Sasol Strategy. Leaders were assessed against 
‘What Good Looks Likes’ profiles to identify and 
address leadership capability gaps. Data insights 
derived from the process are used to enhance 
our culture priorities, talent, succession and 
development planning;

•  Continued with the implementation of our 
leadership development approach to build 
inspirational leadership capabilities at all layers 
of the organisation in line with the defined Sasol 
leadership capabilities;

•  Continue to develop identified high potential 

individuals in middle management roles through 
our Learning, Experiencing, Accelerating and 
Potential programme (LEAP). We provide 
focused, integrated and accelerated talent 
development, career planning and mobility. 
LEAP is a two- to five-year career development 
programme that gives the identified individuals 
exposure to different roles across our business. 
This is supported by formal learning and 
mentorship with the aim of transitioning 
candidates into senior leadership roles;

•  Continued to invest in the development of a 

virtual and digital learning platform intended to 
host various learning modalities and content;
•  Continued to strengthen frontline leadership 

capability through our Frontline Leadership 
Development programmes and modules; and
•  Assisted 414 leaders to complete the Leader-

as-Coach training programme in Southern 
Africa. This is to ensure that participants are 
competent in applying the coaching style aimed 
at embedding technical, function, managerial 
and behavioural competencies to improve the 
performance of subordinate employees. One-on-
one coaches and mentors were identified and 
assigned to individuals for all leadership layers.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

15

Leadership capability 
development 

To develop inspiring and caring leaders who set the tone from the 
top as they role model the values in creating inclusive, innovative 
and high-performing work environments.

Culture transformation 

To establish a diverse and high-performing workforce that 
experiences equity, inclusion and a sense of belonging and 
embraces innovation and collaboration.

Competitive 
compensation and 
benefits enhanced by a 
supportive and caring 
workplace 

Talent Management, 
skills and competencies 

To offer competitive compensation, appropriate and sustainable 
benefits and wellbeing programmes in a supportive and caring 
working environment to attract, engage and retain the right people.

Although we experience very low employee turnover, we continue 
to drive focused retention measures for critical skills and continue 
to build healthy talent pipelines and feeder streams through our 
succession and our bursary programmes to ensure we meet future 
business requirements.

People transformation 
to a green economy 

Although very early in this journey, we already established 
programmes to support our workforce during the transition as we 
execute the decarbonisation roadmap. Recent examples include 
Project Ntsika and Bridge to Work.

Performance 
management 

Digital HR

To enhance and augment our performance management systems.

To ensure the right people management policies and procedures 
are implemented and business processes are in place to enable 
successful delivery of the HR strategy across the globe.

   457 of African and Coloured females appointed across all roles 
and levels in South Africa.
  120 people with disabilities appointed in South Africa.
   61% of employees belonging to trade unions in Southern Africa.

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONSSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONS // Human Capital Management CONTINUED

PERFORMANCE

CULTURE TRANSFORMATION

To promote diversity, equity, inclusion and belonging 
in the workplace, we focused on gender equity, 
the inclusion of people with disabilities (PwD), 
employment equity and skills development, 
inclusive culture and practices:

Gender equity 
•  Our work on the empowerment of women 

addressed barriers to gender equity and placed 
emphasis on equitable representation, skills 
and capability building and ensuring an inclusive 
culture for women. Improving equitable gender 
representation across all role categories, with an 
emphasis on African and Coloured (AC) females in 
South Africa.

•  Through our talent management processes, we 

increased the number of AC females in succession 
pools for senior leadership and critical roles and 
drove focused leadership programmes.  
The health and diversity of our pre-investment 
pools remained critical to ensuring the 
sustainability of our talent pipelines. Our Graduate 
Development Programme comprised of 44% 
females. Bursars comprised of 54% females while 
our Learnerships comprised of 42% females.

In FY23, we worked to enable a diverse and 
high-performing workforce that experiences equity, 
inclusion and a sense of belonging and embraces 
innovation and collaboration. 

We created an engaged, enabled and energised 
workforce and empowered our leadership to improve 
employee engagement and enablement. Through our 
refined listening approach and employee 
engagements, which includes tools such as change 
risk assessments, pulse engagements and our 
Heartbeat survey as well as Townhall meetings.  
We also identified key themes from our FY22 
Heartbeat survey and integrated them with culture 
journey plans across our business. 

Overall employee engagement increased from 61% 
in FY20 to 75% in FY22. Our Heartbeat 2022 survey 
focused on the following themes: 

•  Employee Engagement
•  Goal Clarity and Alignment 
•  Performance Enablement
•  Living our Values
•  Leadership Effectiveness
•  Safety Behaviour
•  Diversity, Equity and Inclusion
•  Company Reputation
•  Team Effectiveness
•  Growth and Recognition

At the centre of our cultural transformation 
in Southern Africa were the ‘leadership commitment 
journeys’. These focused on fostering a safe and 
caring workplace in support of Zero Harm as well as 
founders’ mentality to inculcate customer centricity 
and owner’s mindset, strengthening our employee 
experience and realising our People Promise.

Heartbeat Survery Response Rate
(%)

100

80

60

40

20

0

25%

75%

Response

No Response

Response by Gender
(%)

Response by Tenure Group
(%)

Response by Country
(%)

72%  Male
28%  Female

7%  Less than 1 year
17%  1 – 4 years
20% 5 – 9 years
20% 10 – 14 years
15%  15 – 19 years
21%  20+ years

86% South Africa
5%  Germany
4%  United States
2% 
2%  Other (15 countries)*
1%  Mozambique

Italy

2%  Under 26 years old
26%  26 – 35 years old
38% 26 – 45 years old
24%  46 – 55 years old
10%  56 – 65 years old

*  China, United Kingdom, Slovakia, Singapore, United Arab Emirates, Netherlands, 

Belgium, India, Mexico, Qatar, Japan, Brazil, France, Hong Kong and Spain

Response by Age Group
(%)

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

16

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONSSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONS // Human Capital Management CONTINUED

PERFORMANCE

CULTURE TRANSFORMATION CONTINUED

People with disabilities inclusion
•  Through a campaign, which was intended to raise awareness and encourage voluntary declarations 

of persons with disabilities in South Africa, we noted an increase in employee confidence to voluntarily 
declare their disabilities. Furthermore, we appointed 120 new PwD learners to grow our 2022 baseline 
of 205 to 313. Seventy five of the learners were absorbed through our strategic partner, Gauteng 
City College.

Employment equity (EE) and skills development
•  Driving our EE and Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment goals in South Africa and our 

commitment to localisation in Mozambique remained critical. Our FY23 one-year EE plan in South 
Africa continued to emphasise on improving the representation of AC males and females as well as 
PwDs across all occupational levels, while maintaining equitable representation across all population 
groups. We continued to hold ourselves accountable to our EE, localisation and diversity targets, 
in part, by incorporating our targets into our short-term incentive scorecard. 

•  We continued to focus on development interventions and our career pre-investment pools such as 

learnerships, apprenticeships and bursaries which are critical to secure and develop a pipeline of 
future talent for Sasol.

Inclusive culture and practices
•  We share best practice and learning through our Global Diversity and Inclusion Leadership Network.
•  To strengthen our drive towards an inclusive culture, safe workplace and further embed our Values 

of BE Accountable and BE Caring,our gender-based violence and femicide awareness drive challenged 
violence against women and children.

•  Our women networks, including ‘Women in Operations’ and ‘Women in Mining’, remained catalysts 

in our work to deliver diversity, equity, inclusion and belonging. 204 women participated in our 
mentorship circles.

•  Measures remained in place to protect female employees from potential hazards in their work 

environments during pregnancy and after the birth of a child while breastfeeding. These included 
measures to eliminate risks for the period of pregnancy prior to maternity leave and for a period of up 
to six months after childbirth.

Through or partnership with the Global UN Compact Network with the aim of improve inclusion and 
targeted gender equality, we participated in the Gender Gap Analysis tool aimed at helping organisations 
assess gender equality and inclusion across the workplace, marketplace and community. Sasol scored 91% 
– which puts us at the Leader category. Currently only 4% of companies in South Africa that participated 
are considered ‘Leaders’, this was also confirmed through the Heartbeat with the Value of inclusion being 
rated highly favourable by more than 71% employees across all layers and regions.

Global gender representation including management 
South Africa
(%)

Mozambique
(%)

South African gender and race profile as at 30 June 2023

74% Male
26% Female

78% Male
22% Female

Eurasia
(%)

Americas
(%)

Occupational level

Top management

Senior management

Middle management

Junior management

Semi-skilled

Unskilled

Male (M)

Female (F)

A

8

170

1 012

5 349

6 714

143

150

C

2

26

116

254

144

22

564

10

I

4

104

218

247

66

5

W

11

375

962

2 521

599

31

A

6

97

770

1 827

1 737

120

8

20

151

C

0

17

86

183

63

14

363

19

I

2

45

192

146

23

1

5

W

2

108

543

884

133

5

6

Foreign 
nationals
M

0

8

39

18

97

0

162

0

162

10

3 948

F

0

5

9

1

0

25

0

Total

35

955

11 438

9 577

341

26 294

369

Total including 
non-permanent employees

13 546

574

652

4 519

4 708

382

414

1 681

25

26 663

A: African C: Coloured I: Indian W: White  * Assured by Deloitte & Touche/Tholisiwe –  SR

 refer to page 63

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

17

75% Male
25% Female

73% Male
27% Female

Non-permanent

Total permanent employees

13 396

644

4 499

4 557

409

1 675

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONSSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONS // Human Capital Management CONTINUED

PERFORMANCE

COMPETITIVE COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS ENHANCED  
BY A SUPPORTIVE AND CARING WORKPLACE

Delivering a compelling 
Employee Value 
Proposition (EmpVP)
Our Sasol People Promise aims to 
provide a unique employee 
experience and a compelling 
EmpVP to a diverse workforce 
through our Values of being safe, 
caring, inclusive, accountable and 
resilient. 

We continue to demonstrate our 
EmpVP by focusing attention on 
communication on our campaign 
in South Africa and our 
comprehensive wellbeing 
strategy.

Enhanced global pay 
transparency has enabled line 
managers to own the pay 
narrative and to be equipped 
when having pay conversations 
with employees. We are 
congnisant of the increased 
attention given to pay equity. 
Considering this, we are currently 
reviewing the data to fully 
understand our position and plan 
how we deal with any challenges 
we find in the most appropriate 
manner.

Employer brand
Our employer brand is informed 
by what people think, feel and 
experience about Sasol as a place 
of work. We work to ensure that 
the Sasol employer brand 
remains relevant and compelling 
so that we attract and secure the 
right people who can excel in 
their careers and contribute 
towards our Purpose of 
‘Innovating for a better world’. 

In FY23 for the eighth year 
running, Sasol was certified a 
‘Top Employer’ in South Africa. 
The ranking is awarded to the 
most outstanding employers who 
demonstrate people practices 
including rewards and benefits, 
performance management, talent 
development and recruitment, to 
mention only a few. Through 
Heartbeat 81% of employees 
indicated their intend to stay at 
Sasol in the foreseeable future.

For FY23, we have hired 1 614 
permanent employees in 
Southern Africa, whilst 59% of 
filled vacancies across all role 
categories were from 
internal hires.

Sasol has an employee turnover 
of 1 725. This represents a global 
number below 7% which is within 
our acceptable target range.

WWW  For further breakown of our 
employee turnover, refer to www.sasol.
com/sustainability/human-capital

Employee wellbeing
Employee wellbeing at Sasol 
remains one of the key enablers 
of a stable employment 
environment and a productive 
and engaged labour force across 
all our operations. Our approach 
to employee wellbeing 
encourages employee-centric 
support where we attempt to 
assist colleagues at first contact. 
We continuously ensure that 
managers are better capacitated 
with skills to identify and 
appropriately manage wellbeing 
issues in the workplace.

LABOUR STABILITY AND EMPLOYEE PRODUCTIVITY

TALENT MANAGEMENT, SKILLS AND COMPETENCIES 

consistent corrective action 
application of natural justice 
when addressing areas of 
misconduct and encourage 
timeous and consistent 
corrective actions; and

•  Supporting a just and equitable 

transition as we decarbonise.

Performance management
The primary purpose of Sasol’s 
performance management process 
is to promote higher levels of 
employee performance, in support 
of the business strategy, associated 
goals and high-performance culture. 
This process covers all employees 
outside of the collective bargaining 
units. 

Digital HR
To drive functional effectiveness 
and competitive advantage, our 1HR 
system provides a people 
management platform that 
leverages technology and enables 
the business to make trusted, 
data-driven decisions. It was 
implemented in Southern Africa, 
Eurasia and North America. 1HR was 
designed to align our HR processes 
with leading practices and enhance 
our HR service delivery.

Maintaining labour stability 
through effective and 
collaborative partnerships
To maintain a stable, productive and 
engaged labour and employment 
environment across all our 
operations in FY23, we continued:

•  Driving identified High Severity 

Incident-related frontline 
leadership development with an 
enhanced focus on process safety 
fundamentals;

•  Formal engagement structures 
such as partnership forums in 
Southern Africa are in place and 
operational at operating entities 
and also at the regional level, to 
ensure effective partnerships 
with recognised trade unions and 
works councils;

•  Respecting the right to collective 
bargaining. 61% of our employees 
in Southern Africa are members 
of trade unions;

•  Reviewing and updating our 

policies and procedures in line 
with business and legislative 
requirements; 

•  Implementing appropriate 

strategies for multi-sectoral wage 
negotiations; 

•  Employing labour from the open 
market. Under no circumstances 
are our employees subject to any 
form of forced and compulsory 
labour and we do not make use of 
child labour;

•  Ensuring fairness, equality and 

the application of natural justice 
when addressing misconduct. 
We achieve this through our 
disciplinary code, which complies 
with applicable legal frameworks. 
We encourage timeous and 

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

18

Talent management
Attracting, developing and 
retaining high-performing people 
remains fundamental to creating 
value. Our talent management 
approach drives the building of 
our leadership capability and 
bench strength for the 
sustainability of our foundation 
and future business. 

Skills and capacity 
building
In FY23, we remained focused on 
improving our competitiveness 
and unlocking value by developing 
priority capabilities to sustain our 
current operations, ready for the 
low-carbon future and access new 
opportunities. These capabilities 
included commercial excellence in 
sales and marketing; operations 
excellence in ensuring reliability; 
procurement; the cost-
effectiveness of operations; 
and low-carbon energy.

To develop and sustain a pipeline 
of future talent, we invested 
significantly in critical skills and 
core capability development.  
We have invested R1 348 million in 
Southern Africa for training and 
development and a total of 
R1 431 million for the Group. 

We have developed 26 519 
employees in various fields and 
programmes in South Africa. 
We also invested R481 million to 
bursaries, graduate development 
and, learnerships as well as our 
apprenticeship and internship 
programmes. 

We continue to build and sustain 
technical and operational talent 
pools through the bursary and 
learnership programmes. 
During the FY23, we funded 544 
undergraduate and postgraduate 
bursaries focusing mainly on 
engineering, science and 
technology. Our skills academies 
remained favourably positioned 
to ensure a pipeline of artisans, 
critical to Sasol and the future 
development of South Africa and 
Mozambique. Trades offered in 
these academies include fitting, 
electrical, instrumentation, 
welding, turning, fabrication and 
rigging. 1 378 artisan learners 
were trained in these 
programmes during FY23 and on 
average, 50% of the people in 
learnerships are permanently 
appointed within Sasol operations 
upon the completion of their 
training.

Total investment in skill development
(R million)

TOTAL 
R1 348 
MILLION

R487,28  Employee Training and Development
R334,58  Other (License Fees, Training Opex 

and Overheads)

R307,18  Learnerships
R84,81  Graduate Development Programme
R73,81 
R23,99 
R21,17 
R15,27 

Bursaries
Technical Coaches & Mentors
Employee Study Aid
Technicians and Inspectors in Training

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONSSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONS // Human rights 

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
We recognise our responsibility to uphold and respect human rights and ensure the integration 
of human rights into our business practices. The UN Guiding Principles (UNGP) on Business and 
Human Rights (BHR) define salient issues as ‘the human rights that are most at risk of the most 
severe negative impacts through a company’s activities or business relationships’. We have 
identified the following as our salient human rights issues:
1.  Respecting diversity.
2.  Safe and healthy working environment.
3.  Supply chain related risks including modern slavery.
4.  Respecting the rights of local communities.
5.  Managing Sasol’s environmental ‘footprint’.

Our BHR framework consists of three phases:

Phase 1

The development of a systematic approach to identify, prevent, mitigate 
and account for human rights impact in line with the expectations of UNGP 17.

Phase2

A human rights focused self-assesment process led by individual Sasol business 
units, to identify risks in relation to the five salient human rights risks areas.

Phase 3

The implementation of systematic risk mitigation procedures.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

19

OUR GROUP APPROACH

Our approach to BHR is aligned with 
international standards, guidelines such as 
the UNGPs and the United Nations Global 
Compact (UNGC) and national laws and 
regulations in the jurisdictions in which 
we operate.

Our BHR policies and procedures encompass 
our own operations, supply chain, joint 
ventures and other business partners. 
Together, we uphold human rights values 
and principles in the way we do business.

   Completed Phase 2 of BHR due diligence.
   Ensured that 99% of our employees who form part of the target 
audience completed BHR training.
   Published the annual slavery and human trafficking statements 
online.

PERFORMANCE

Embedding of our risk management approach
In FY23, we implemented Phase 2 of the BHR 
framework. This entailed risk identification within 
our own business and value chain processes across 
Sasol Business Units. It also involved embedding 
human rights due diligence into our enterprise-
wide risk management approach. The review of the 
group-wide human rights risk profile includes a 
business unit self-assessment questionnaire used 
to identify potential human rights issues that may 
arise in connection with operation and business.

We started reviewing our group-wide human rights 
risk profile in FY22 with the activities of two Sasol 
business units. In FY23, we extended the review to 
Sasol Mining and Sasol ecoFT. The self-
assessments led to the identification of priority 
areas on which to focus. These included the 
process of embedding and demonstrating the 
application of human rights policies and 
procedures in relation with our joint venture 
partners. During this risk review process,  

we looked at issues of encroachments and land 
acquisitions as well as human rights issues relating 
to our products. We also considered corrective 
measures that have been put in place, as well as 
the review of the adequacy and effectiveness of 
business unit’s risk mitigation measures.

Phase 3 of the risk review process involves the 
implementation of a systematic and standardised 
process for ensuring that human rights issues are 
integrated to our business processes.  
We developed a BHR risk matrix to categorise 
suppliers based on risk exposure. To ensure that 
appropriate risk mitigation actions are taken,  
we also developed and rolled out human rights 
contract clauses for suppliers in accordance with 
each supplier’s risk rating.

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONSSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONS // Human rights CONTINUED

PERFORMANCE

Human rights due diligence processes
We have developed and implemented a due diligence process to proactively identify and 
assess potential impacts and risks related to respecting human rights across our value 
chain.
Own business: As part of our BHR programme, we have undertaken an assessment of the 
potential human rights impacts that are salient to our business units i.e. Sasol Energy, Sasol 
Chemicals, Sasol Mining and Sasol ecoFT.
Suppliers: We have incorporated a human rights due diligence questionnaire for suppliers, 
within our screening and due diligence processes. This helps to identify potential human 
rights risks and categorise suppliers for further engagement on pertinent human right 
issues such as child labour, forced labour, gender balance, equal remuneration, etc.
Mergers and acquisitions: We have developed human rights-focused due diligence 
guidance for mergers and acquisitions, which we have included in our internal mergers and 
acquisitions handbook.
Joint ventures: We have developed and implemented a group-wide human rights due 
diligence questionnaire which we require our joint ventures (JV) partners to complete in 
order to do business with Sasol. This supports the identification of potential human rights 
risks associated with the relevant JV partner.

Awareness and training
During FY23, online BHR training was provided globally to 
Sasol employees falling within a specified target audience 
and the training focused on creating awareness around the 
requirements of the Human Rights Policy and the Supplier 
Code of Conduct, with specific attention placed on issues 
relating to human trafficking and slavery. By end-May 2023, 
99% of the targeted employees had completed the training.

We provide training to our suppliers on both human rights 
issues, anti-bribery and corruption. The focus is to create 
awareness around the requirements of the Supplier Code of 
Conduct and the Sasol Anti-Bribery and Corruption Policy. 
There are 5 344 vendors registered to do business with Sasol 
in South Africa and Mozambique. Of these, 2 446 are actively 
doing business with Sasol. For FY23, 380 suppliers out of a 
database of 2 446 active suppliers, completed training. Since 
the inception of the training requirements, 3 481 suppliers 
out the total database of 5 344 completed the training, 
constituting 66% completion of the entire vendor base.

Publication of annual slavery and human 
trafficking statements
Pursuant to Section 54 of the United Kingdom Modern Slavery 
Act, 2015, we published our annual Slavery and Human 
Trafficking Statement for the financial year ended 30 June 
2023. This statement describes the measures that Sasol has 
taken to ensure the eradication of human trafficking from our 
business and supply chains.

In compliance with the California Transparency in Supply 
Chains Act of 2010 (SB 657), Sasol (USA) Corporation issues a 
public statement regarding our commitment and efforts to 
eliminate all forms of slavery and human trafficking. This is 
even though it does not engage in the actions described in 
Section 3(c)(1)-(5) of the California Transparency in Supply 
Chains Act 2010.

WWW  For information on our BHR activities, refer to:
www.sasol.com/sustainability/human-rights
www.sasol.com/suppliers/north-america/become-supplier

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

20

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONSSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONS // Ethics

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
Promoting high ethical standards and combating corruption throughout 
our sphere of influence is an important part of our drive to deliver social 
value through our core activities. 

OUR GROUP 
APPROACH

The philosophy of our Group Ethics Office is to enable 
business success on the earned foundation and reputation 
that Sasol is an ethical company that not only does things 
right but does the right things. 

Sasol’s approach to ethics is principles-based and anchored in the company’s shared Values. 
Sound ethical values are a cornerstone of our business and our Code of Conduct (our Code) 
underpins the manner in which we manage our business and how we behave. Our approach 
to the management of ethics includes programmes which are both proactive and reactive in 
nature. In particular we ensure that all reports of potential transgressions are investigated 
and resolved. We express zero tolerance for any unethical behaviour including discrimination, 
victimisation and harassment in all its forms. The Sasol Anti-Bribery policy further prohibits 
all forms of corruption including facilitation payments, excessive gifts, entertainment or 
hospitality as well as inappropriate social investment activities.

   2 118 employees completed the managing gifts, entertainment 
and hospitality training. 
   Competition training undertaken for 99% of target audience.

WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION 

ANTI-BRIBERY, ANTI-TRUST 
AND COMPETITION LAW

PERFORMANCE

SASOL ETHICSLINE

The Sasol EthicsLine can be accessed telephonically 
or in writing and is available 24 hours a day/seven 
days a week in South Africa, United States, 
United Kingdom, China, Singapore, Germany, 
Mozambique, France, Netherlands, Slovakia, 
Hong Kong and Italy. 

People contacting the EthicsLine can be assisted 
in South African languages and the languages of 
some of the regions we operate. These include 
Mandarin, Portuguese, Italian, French, Dutch, 
Spanish, Slovakian and German.

In FY23, we received 449 calls on our EthicsLine, 
some of which had multiple allegations, around 
29% more than in FY22. The most frequent 
reported misconduct related to unfair treatment, 

appointment irregularities, unacceptable 
behaviour and fraud and misrepresentation. 
Out of the 108 substantiated allegations;

•  27 related to unfairness
•  31 related to dishonesty
•  19 related to disrespect
•  31 related to irresponsibility
15 of the cases related to dishonesty are still 
undergoing disciplinary actions and awaiting final 
sanctions. The other substantiated investigations 
resulted in management actions.

Sasol promotes a culture in which all 
stakeholders and employees are encouraged 
to speak up and report unethical, illegal, or 
undesirable conduct involving Sasol and those 
engaged with it, without fear of retaliation 
and reprisal. Sasol has zero tolerance for any 
victimisation or retaliation against any 
whistleblower who in good faith makes a report 
or against any witnesses who supports an 
ethics investigation. 

Everyone who deals with ethics call reports 
and the investigation thereof is bound by strict 
confidentiality obligations. Whistleblowers have 
the option to remain anonymous. Our 
whistleblower policy outlines and encourages 
all stakeholders to report unethical behaviour. 

We provide annual training on compliance and 
ethics. Our guidelines, standards and procedures 
are updated regularly in line with changes in 
the law. 

Sasol rolled out four separate compliance 
training modules in FY23. The compliance 
training included competition law, anti-bribery, 
sanctions and business and human rights. 

Sasol conducted a risk assessment and rolled 
out the compliance training to the employees 
identified as posing a higher risk of being 
exposed to compliance risks. The process targets 
employees on role category execution and above 
who have to confirm compliance.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

21

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONSSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONS // Ethics CONTINUED

ETHICS TRAINING AND AWARENESS

MANAGING CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

PERFORMANCE

We provide our employees with ethics training 
and awareness to foster a resilient ethical 
culture, where ethical behaviour is the norm and 
is reflected in everything that we do and in every 
business decision.

We provide ethics training and ongoing 
communication to employees including a course 
called ‘Exploring Ethics and Economic Crime’ 
jointly presented by the Group Ethics Office 
and Sasol Assurance Services. We also provide 
targeted training on Sasol’s Conflict of Interest 
Policy. To increase the discourse on ethics, our 
CEO includes ethics messages in his webinar 
addresses to employees.

We provide training to Board members on 
Sasol’s Code of Conduct, as well as on our 
policies related to conflict of interest and gifts, 
entertainment and hospitality.

LIVING THE VALUES

We manage conflicts of interest in accordance 
with the Sasol Conflicts of Interest Policy and the 
Process Guidelines. Employees are always 
encouraged to avoid any actual, potential or 
perceived conflicts of interest. Should a conflict 
of interest arise, this must be declared, 
mitigated and approved using the Sasol 
declaration system (SDS) or manually in the 
jurisdictions which do not have access to the 
SDS. If the conflict is approved then, mitigation 
actions must be captured and agreed in writing.

2 354 employees elected to complete the conflict 
of interest training. 

MANAGING GIFTS, ENTERTAINMENT  
AND HOSPITALITY

By managing gifts, entertainment and 
hospitality we work to reduce possible fraud or 
corruption by our employees and stakeholders 
and ensure adherence to the Prevention and 
Combating of Corrupt Activities Act, 12 of 2004. 

We require the pre-approval of all gifts, 
entertainment or hospitality received or given 
with a value exceeding a specified limit, or which 
are offered or received from public officials, or 
which may create a conflict of interest for 
Sasol employees.

2 118 employees elected to complete the 
managing gifts, entertainment and hospitality 
computer based training. 

FY23 OUTCOMES

More than:

•  6 600 employees had to complete the online 

anti-bribery, sanctions, human rights and 
competition law training modules. 

•  490 employees in the higher risk 

environments, attended classroom based 
anti-bribery and sanctions training sessions.

•  6 000 employees submitted compliance 

confirmations, signalling their undertaking 
to comply with anti-bribery and competition 
law policies.

WWW  For more information on our Ethics programme, refer to 
www.sasol.com/sustainability/ethics/ethics-at-sasol

1 326

North America 

employees 

167

Gas sourcing 
operations 

completed the Sasol 

Code of Conduct 

training

employees provided 

with customised 
ethics training

313

Employees provided 
with exploring ethics 
and economic crime 

training 

2 068

New employees 

provided with ethics 

training

SASOL ETHICS 
COMMUNITY

137

32

19

Ethics Investigators

Ethics officers

Ethics Coordinators

Compliance training

99%

employees who fall within the target 
audience, completed the anti-bribery 
and competition law training.

Annual compliance confirmation 
was received for more than  

6 000 

employees (from execution level 
to CEO and President level). They 
acknowledged that they understand 
and will comply with, inter alia, Sasol 
anti-bribery policies, competition law 
policies and the Code of Conduct.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

22

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONSSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONS // Enduring operations

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
Sasol is committed to achieve world class operations (WCO) through an 
embedded operations excellence culture. 

OUR GROUP 
APPROACH

FY23 OUTCOMES
Through the focused value stream approach and innovation platform, the improvement 
initiative funnel increased by R4,0 billion during 2023.

Improvement initiatives to the value of R2,0 billion matured from the design and 
development phase into delivery during 2023.

FY23 kicked off with a focus on renewing and realigning our vision for WCO, with the following identified 
as key components.

BUSINESS EXCELLENCE

  With competitive advantage

SUCCESS STRATEGY

BUSINESS RESILIENCE

BUSINESS GROWTH

y
e
n
r
u
o

j
 

O
C
W

 

 

 
r
u
o
e
t
a
r
e
l
e
c
c
a
o
t
 
s
t
n
e
n
o
p
m
o
c
y
e
K

 

OPERATIONAL EXCELLENCE

INNOVATION

MECHANISTICS

DIGITISATION

SUPPORTED BY KEY ENABLERS

  Human resource management 
  Performance management, etc 

AGILE WAYS OF WORKING

PEOPLE CHANGE MANAGEMENT

CULTURE 

LEADERSHIP 

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

23

Operational excellence (OE) is embedded in the culture of the business, enabled by driving 
structured improvement cycles, delivering accelerated business results by FY25 and 
persisting in our transformation towards WCO (Future Sasol).
This is being achieved by means of:
    Making visible the key business aspects that require focus and improvement to 
systematically advance the Business’ strategy and ambition;
    Developing insights on the essential business improvement priorities through 
professional guidance and expertise, both internally and/or externally sourced; and
    Using a collaborative approach to solve the business priorities by developing and 
implementing fit-for-purpose business solutions that deliver sustainable performance.

The mechanistic approach includes OE and 
digitisation which enables us to balance business 
resilience and growth. While OE focuses on 
optimisation of known approaches to deliver 
intended value, innovation focuses on different 
approaches to deliver enhanced value with optimal 
investments. 

In August 2022, we launched a programme to achieve 
sustainable innovation through a digital platform, 
integrated processes, measures of success and 
embedding a culture of innovative problem solving in 
our people.

Sasol employees were energised by this process, 
making their voices and innovative ideas heard and 
upskilling through effective problem solving. We are 
achieving collaboration towards enabling WCO, 
keeping true to our Purpose of "Innovating for a 
better world".

Digital transformation is a key enabler to WCO and we 
are developing our digital skills in all areas of the 
Sasol business. The digital teams in operations are 
focusing on optimising the performance of our assets 
and processes and the automation of our business 
processes. In keeping with Sasol’s commitment to 
safety and improving our employees’ productivity, 
the digital teams are also developing a totally 
connected worker plan. 

Agile ways of working are essential in ensuring a 
customer-centric and collaborative approach to 
deliver early incremental value. By leveraging the 
collective wisdom and creative potential of our 
people, we avoid costly failures and focus on 
continuous improvement and innovation.

For Sasol to stay competitive, our ambition is for our 
operations to realise first quartile performance 
compared to our peers. To achieve this, we apply the 
following guiding principles:

•  Efficient production and maintenance practices 
within and across our operating model entities.
•  Optimised and streamlined portfolios avoiding 

duplication, focused on core activities.

•  Lean, optimised enabling functions.
•  Fit-for-purpose accountability and governance.
•  Positive contribution to Sasol’s bottom line.

In support of the Sasol 2.0 transformation 
programme, our operations must continue to 
generate cash while reducing cost. This continuous 
improvement approach and mindset will drive the 
business forward, by improving productivity and 
reliability, enhancing customer value and improving 
safety all round.

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONSSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONS // Product stewardship 

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
To ensure safe chemicals management we work diligently to continuously 
improve the SHE impacts of our products, as well as manage security 
throughout the product life cycle, in partnership with suppliers, customers 
and other stakeholders.

OUR GROUP 
APPROACH

Through our well-established product stewardship approach, 
we endeavor to ensure safe chemicals management throughout 
a product’s life cycle while ensuring the chemistry contributes 
to society and benefits the environment. This is addressed by:

    Building trust in the Sasol brand by fulfilling our commitment to product stewardship along the 
value chain, which also limits our product risk and liability;
     Having a team of global technical experts with a sound understanding of the hazards, risks and 
regulatory requirements driving continuous improvements to prevent product-related incidents  
and limit health and environmental exposure; and
    Conscientiously and collaboratively engaging with our partners and stakeholders along the value 
chain, promoting the safe and responsible storage, use, conversion and end-of-life management  
of our products.

   Successful road transport emergency drill simulation.
   Winner of the 2022 Chemicals Allied Industry 
Association (CAIA) Responsible Care® Water Award.

SASOL’S INTERNATIONAL SUSTAINABILITY AND CARBON CERTIFICATION (ISCC) 
PLUS CERTIFICATIONS

The ISCC PLUS certification promotes environmentally, socially and 
economically sustainable production. Three of our Eurasian sites are ISCC 
PLUS certified to use bio-based and circular feedstocks on a mass balance 
basis to replace fossil-based feedstocks.

FY23 OUTCOMES
Runner up for 2022 Responsible Care® 
Initiative of the year
Supporting Inkwazi Isu to Upgrade 
Garden Sites – Sasol directly funded 
R3,6 million to the first two sites and 
handed over to the local municipality 
on World Clean Up Day in September 
2022. In addition Sasol has assisted in 
securing support of $1,5 million from the 
Alliance to End Plastic Waste to upgrade 
an additional 10 municipal garden sites 
into buy back centres ( SR
 for more 
information, refer to page 26).

Sasol reaffirms commitment to 
Responsible Care® by signing both 
the International Council of Chemical 
Associations (ICCA) Responsible Care® 
Global Charter and the CAIA declaration.

Winner of the 2022 CAIA Responsible 
Care® Water Award 
(SEO) support to Metsimaholo Local 
Municipality with a focus on Water, 
Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) in 
surrounding communities.

PERFORMANCE

DESIGNING SAFE PRODUCTS

METHANOL USE IN NON-INDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS

To ensure that Sasol offers the market a safe and competitive product 
portfolio for today and the future, our ongoing portfolio review process is 
fundamental. Regulatory scanning, screening of peer reviewed scientific 
research on chemical safety and product development work occur on a 
continuous basis to ensure that any anticipated changes in legal 
requirements that impact our products are known and addressed in 
advance of formal regulatory changes being adopted. Sasol has a few 
substances listed on the European Union’s Registration, Evaluation, 
Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals regulation (REACH) substances 
of very high concern (candidate list). Sasol has stopped the production of 
three products over the last few years, since they had been listed on the 
authorisation list. Our value chain is free of any materials relating to the 
multilateral environmental agreements on chemicals under the Montreal 
Protocol or the Stockholm Convention. With regards to our compliance 
with the Basel Convention, we export spent catalysts containing precious 
metals for the purposes of recovery of these metals to be used in the 
manufacture of fresh catalysts. Our efforts reduce the need for mining 
and contribute to a circular economy. One Sasol product is certified under 
the voluntary International Cyanide Management Code.

Sasol continues to support CAIA in stakeholder 
education and awareness initiatives by compiling 
documents which seek to share important and 
targeted information on key health and safety 
aspects of methanol, e.g. uses, hazards and risks, 
personal protective equipment and emergency 
preparedness.

LOW DIOXANE ETHERSULFATE 

Sasol has succeeded in producing a lower 
dioxane ethersulfate. We responded to global 
industry demand for low-dioxane versions, as 
legislation around the concentration of 1,4-dioxane 
in personal care and home care products gets more 
stringent worldwide. True to the Purpose of 
‘Innovating for a better world’.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

24

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONSSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONS // Product life cycle stages

Our commitment to Product Stewardship is embedded throughout the value chain

1. BUY STAGE
Sasol's South African procurement processes 
limit the risk of inadvertent non-compliant 
purchases of controlled chemicals.

2. MAKE STAGE
Continuous improvement of procedures and protocols 
focused on chemical control legislation and product 
environmental sustainability.

BUY  
STAGE

MAKE  
STAGE

6. END-OF-LIFE STAGE
Active participation in initiatives 
such as the Recycling Oil Saves 
Lives Foundation and supporting 
the Extended Producer 
Responsibility Legislation 
ensures a responsible and 
sustainable end-of-life stage 
for our products.

END-

OF-LIFE 
STAGE

PRODUCT 
LIFE CYCLE 

STAGES

SELL
STAGE

3. SELL STAGE
Implementing all applicable 
regulatory requirements 
including being proactive by 
undertaking market relevant 
scans for potential market 
and legislative changes.

USAGE  
STAGE

LOGISTICS 

STAGE

4. LOGISTICS STAGE
Continued implementation of learnings from incident 
investigations, Transport Indicator of Performance (TIoP) analysis 
and collaborating with our respective logistics stakeholders.

5. USAGE STAGE
Customer assessments and training ensures the effective and 
responsible use of Sasol’s products. The Sasol Chemicals Life 
Cycle management provides support through technical 
assessments and site evaluations.

TRANSPORT INDICATOR OF PERFORMANCE (TIoP)

Our TIoP is a group-wide measure of the incident severity rate as a function of product transport distance travelled. TIoP is split 
into two components: the TIoP reflecting on avoidable incidents, where the transporter driver could reasonably have done 
something more to prevent an incident and the TIoP reflecting on the unavoidable component where all incident preventative 
controls were adhered to and nothing further could reasonably have been done to avoid the incident. There was an increase in 
the TIoP during 2023 and this was attributed to the shift towards transporting additional products using road vehicles due to 
challenges experienced with rail over this period. Three third party unavoidable fatalities regrettably occurred, however, these 
were carefully investigated and analysed to strengthen controls where possible.

Total severity of incidents
TIoP
Number of third party and transporter fatalities

WWW  For more information on Product Stewardship, refer to https://www.sasol.com/

2023

76
1.28
3

2022

66
0.86
0

2021

50
0.59
0

2020

167
1.84
1

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

25

FEATURE STORY

SUCCESSFUL SASOL ENERGY ROAD TRANSPORT 
EMERGENCY SIMULATION CONDUCTED IN POLOKWANE 
Over and above the responsibility to comply with procedures, 
protocols and training regulatory requirements, Sasol has a moral duty 
to distribute its products safely and without threat to employees, 
the public or the environment. 

A major part of our business consists of product movement via road 
transportation. As a result, emergency preparedness and incident 
management are critical. We conduct hazardous material (HAZMAT) 
emergency exercise drills in collaboration with responders who would be 
involved in a real emergency scenario. In this way, we test and improve 
the preparedness of all involved for when they are faced with an 
emergency involving dangerous goods. The exercises are carried out 
under strict controlled conditions. Experienced evaluators perform 
assessments to identify areas of improvement.

In FY23, Sasol Energy carried out public roadshows and a HAZMAT 
exercise, together with various external stakeholders, along an important 
corridor in Limpopo Province, South Africa. The location was selected 
based on the volume of Sasol product transported via that corridor and 
the associated risk profile. The public roadshows create awareness 
and a better understanding of Sasol dangerous goods transported via 
road as well as emergency protocols and the roles and responsibilities 
of the various first responders in the case of emergency. 

The simulated incident involved a Sasol Fuel Delivery Vehicle (fully loaded 
with ULP95) and other motor vehicles including a minibus taxi and a 
bakkie. The incident resulted in the spillage of petrol, multiple injuries, 
fatalities and a secondary incident involving a gas tanker.

During the simulation, emergency services were activated and some of 
the injured were air-lifted to hospital while others were treated on the 
scene. The actions of the participating services were thoroughly 
evaluated by several subject matter specialists. While the final 
recommendations are still under review, the following initial 
opportunities were identified: 

•  The need for effective communication and alignment between 

respective emergency responders and controlling the scene. 

•  Training on how to approach an incident involving dangerous goods. 

The planning and execution of this complex exercise was a success.  
All stakeholders identified opportunities to improve their respective 
processes and committed to take the necessary actions required 
to improve their preparedness for real emergencies.

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONSSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONS // Sustainable use of plastics 

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
Sasol commits to having a meaningful impact on plastic waste leakage 
into the environment through value chain collaboration on projects that 
contribute to a circular economy.

OUR GROUP 
APPROACH

We acknowledge that plastic waste in the environment 
is a concern, is unacceptable and we want to make a 
meaningful impact by:

    Executing our plastics sustainability approach through impact projects, innovation, 
education and collaboration; 
     Collaborating in the value-chain on projects and initiatives that promote and  
develop circularity; and
    Working with the government, relevant industry participants and associations to maximise 
the impact of our contribution.

PERFORMANCE

PACKA-CHING

Guided by our plastics sustainability focus areas and bearing in mind that Environmental Stewardship is one of our material matters, here we provide an update on our relevant initiatives:

CHEMICAL RECYCLING IN SOUTH AFRICA

INKWAZI ISU

Packa-Ching is an initiative run by Polyco. It is an enterprise-
operated mobile recycling service that collects used recyclable 
packaging material from informal settlements and low-income 
areas in South Africa. This helps to reduce waste and create a 
cleaner environment. Packa-Ching also contributes to poverty 
alleviation by paying community members for their used 
recyclables. This provides them with an opportunity to earn an 
income and helps to improve livelihoods. 

Since our sponsorhip in 2019, Packa-Ching has launched 15 units to 
date with more than 70 direct jobs created. We have collected more 
than 10 000 tons of recyclable waste and communities have earned 
more than R10 million. 

The objectives of Packa-Ching are aligned with Sasol’s efforts to 
reduce and mitigate the environmental impact of plastics and to 
implement reduction solutions.

To provide an advanced solution to reducing plastic waste, we are 
continuing our evaluation of a chemical recycling facility in South 
Africa. This facility would complement both Sasol’s current efforts 
to encourage mechanical recycling and the South African 
Government’s Localisation Policy, which is integral to the country’s 
economic recovery plan. 

Chemical recycling is a term used to describe technologies that 
allow the recycling of those plastics that are difficult to recycle 
mechanically. By turning plastic waste back into base chemicals 
and chemical feedstocks, chemical recycling processes have the 
potential to dramatically improve recycling rates and divert plastic 
waste from landfill or incineration. A facility like this will create value 
through the recycling of hard-to-recycle plastic waste and aligns 
with our objective of providing circular and sustainable solutions 
for our customers. 

In order to support this project, we are currently finalising a baseline 
study assessing the waste volumes in areas adjacent to our 
Sasolburg facility. The baseline work will inform further action to 
improve waste management infrastructure in the Vaal Triangle area, 
including the potential development of a chemical recycling facility.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

26

The Inkwazi Isu project is a collaborative effort by a broad range of 
stakeholders to address the plastic waste challenge in eThekwini 
(Durban), South Africa. The project is focused on improving 
recyclable collection services, sorting infrastructure, education 
and clean-up. The project converts municipal garden sites into 
buy-back centres, where reclaimers can bring in their recyclables 
in exchange for cash. The project is funded by several corporates, 
non-governmental organisations, local governments and civic 
organisations.

Inkwazi Isu is addressing serious challenges stemming from poor 
waste management practices, including the impact of plastic waste 
on the environment. The partnership is serving inland communities, 
townships and coastal areas between the Ezimbokodweni and Little 
Amanzimtoti Rivers.

Sasol has funded the upgrade of two municipal refuse garden sites 
into recycling buyback centres, while the Alliance to End Plastic 
Waste (AEPW) is funding the upgrade of ten sites. The project kicked 
off in July 2022 and five out of the 12 sites have been completed. 
Combined efforts have resulted in 4 000 tons of waste collected.

The Inkwazi Isu project forms part of the AEPW flagship programme 
for Sub-Saharan Africa. The project aims to divert approximately 
20 000 tons per annum of plastic waste from landfill while creating 
120 direct jobs. In addition, 50 schools are estimated to become 
collection centres.

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESSAFE AND ENDURING OPERATIONSGROWING SHARED VALUE // Sasol in Society

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
At Sasol, we work to create a positive and measurable socio-economic 
impact, responding to key societal challenges in our operational 
geographies and fenceline communities.

What can 
the broader 
society 
expect from 
Sasol?

Social impact programmes that respond to the needs 
of society.
Interventions to create shared value along the Sasol value chain 
and ecosystem.

Just and responsible transition aligned to the future low carbon/
green economy.

OUR GROUP 
APPROACH

Our approach is founded on our Promise to Society which 
is to be a catalyst for positive change, driving shared 
socio-economic value and by strengthening relationships 
with stakeholders and regulators which is a material matter.  

We achieve our promise by: 
    Contributing to thriving host communities;
   Partnering for socio-economic value;
   Contributing to a just and responsible transition; and
   Placing our key stakeholders and partners at the centre of the implementation process. 

Our Social Investment (SI) approach is underpinned by the following impact focus areas:

OUR DELIVERY APPROACH

QUALITY EDUCATION

SASOL FOR GOOD

Our investment results in enhanced economic participation, contributing to growth and improved quality of 
life within our operating geographies and fenceline communities.

Our social investment (SI) approach is brought to life through a multi-pronged, multi-year methodology to 
respond to the priorities of our fenceline communities. This is to ensure that we deliver impactful and relevant 
programmes which create shared value among various stakeholders. This is accomplished through the 
intersection of Sasol’s intent with our fenceline community priorities and national, provincial and local 
priorities in our operating geographies and fenceline communities.

•  Early childhood education.
•  Science, Technology, 

Engineering and 
Mathematics (STEM) 
in schools education.
•  Technical education.
•  Tertiary education.

BRIDGE TO WORK SKILLS 
PROGRAMMES 

•  Access to work and 

portable skills.

•  Technical and vocational 

education and training (TVET) 
to work transition programmes 
which includes:
•  Training of unemployed 

people aligned with economic 
activity; and

•  Small business development 

and support starter packs 
and mentorship.

•  Skilled volunteering, 

employee giving.

•  Non-governmental 

organisations (NGOs) 
capacity building.

•  Community support 

and philanthropy.

•  Community development.

1

IMPACT
Make a 
measurable 
socio-economic 
difference to 
stakeholders

RELEVANCE
Understand 
stakeholder 
expectations and 
respond effectively 
to diverse 
stakeholders

2

SHARED VALUE

Manage and proactively 
influence engage and 

partner with stakeholders. 
Engage a ‘win-win’ shared 

value outcomes

3

NATIONAL AGENDA
(Including provincial 
and local communities)

3

SASOL 
INTENT

2

1

FENCELINE 
COMMUNITIES

COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT 

COMMUNITY HEALTH AND 
SERVICE INFRASTRUCTURE 

•  Community awareness 

and education.

•  Community waste 

management education.

•  Quality community healthcare.
•  Resilient local service 

infrastructure.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

27

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESGROWING SHARED VALUE – SASOL IN SOCIETYGROWING SHARED VALUE // Sasol in Society // Access to quality education 

OUR GROUP 
APPROACH

Quality education is an enabler and has 
a potentially equalising effect in achieving 
sustainable livelihoods. It is the most 
powerful vehicle for upward socio-economic 
mobility for every individual.

We are driving excellence in Science, Technology, Engineering 
and Mathematics (STEM) education by taking a bottom-up approach. 
We do so by developing systemic interventions to improve STEM teaching 
and learning outcomes to prepare learners for the future world of work. 
Our interventions are therefore focused on teachers, learners, learning 
resources, career guidance and infrastructure improvement programmes.

STIMULATE EARLY 
CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 

 To contribute to developing a strong foundation 
for learning to ensure school readiness and holistic 
development of children.

 To support learning institutions to improve outcomes 
from education initiatives.

NORTH AMERICA

OUTCOMES

SUPPORTING THE 
DEPARTMENT OF 
EDUCATION TO IMPROVE 
STEM IN SCHOOLS

TECHNICAL EDUCATION 
DEVELOPMENT

PREPARE FUTURE 
WORKFORCE THROUGH 
TERTIARY EDUCATION

PROVIDE OUR 
BENEFICIARIES 
WITH ACCESS TO 
PSYCHOSOCIAL SUPPORT

 To support the development of technical and 
vocational skills to address the shortage of critical 
skills in South Africa. We raise awareness about 
technical vocational education in schools and Technical 
and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) colleges 
and its contribution to the economy. We build capacity 
in these institutions and develop engineering-related 
skills in the sector.

 We invest in tertiary education to help individuals build 
the skills that will enable them to participate in the 
economy, contribute to social development and allow 
them to be responsible self-reliant citizens. We also 
support institutions with research and capacity 
building to advance innovation and improve South 
Africa’s global competitiveness in scientific research.

 To mitigate psychological and social challenges that 
hinder academic success of the learners we support.

SOUTH AFRICA

•  Contributed to expansion of access to quality early learning opportunities. Over 270 centres, 964 practitioners and 15 184 

children benefited through our Early Childhood Education programme.

•  Donated 19 mobile science labs to support science education since 2014 to universities, science centres and schools. Three of 

these were donated in FY23. 

•  Over 4 800 learners from 61 schools participating in the Sasol Energy Innovation Schools Challenge.
•  Hosted the first ever virtual Sasol Techno-X, attracting over 36 000 learners.
•  Hosted the annual Technical Teachers Conference virtually, with 1 100 educators participating.
•  Collaborated with the Gauteng North District’s Department of Education to install equipment at six schools to enable access 

•  Implemented an innovative lecturer capacity-building programme for 150 TVET College lecturers, combining virtual training 

to online learning.

and practical workshops to enhance skills.

engagement with Eskom.

in sustainability research.

•  Pioneered the Sasol TVET Bursary Programme which fosters educational opportunities as an outcome of commercial 

•  Awarded 60 undergraduate bursaries in various fields of studies and granted 22 honours, masters and doctoral scholarships 

•  The Etienne Rousseau Theatre presents English set work productions that form part of the educational curriculum for high 
schools. Viewing the productions gives the learners and teachers new and broader perspectives and insights into literature 
understanding. Metsimaholo learners attend the pre-recorded productions of prescribed English set books and over 2 500 
learners benefit.

•  Established seven coding and robotics in schools, science and teacher centres to improve skills for learners.

•  Big Brothers Big Sisters (BBBS) Lonestar programme facilitates and supports one-to-one mentoring relationships between 
Sasol employee volunteers based in Houston, Texas and students at our Partner in Education school, Emerson Elementary.  
80% of our mentors for this programme are women. 

•  30 employees and elementary students were connected through the BBBS mentorship programme, a 30% increase from FY22.
•  Dual-language opportunities boost mentee involvement, showcasing examples of career success for diverse backgrounds.
•  Supported five school-wide STEM engagements at Partner in Education schools across the region, connecting over 800 

students to STEM-enrichment activities. 

•  Multiple STEM-related mentorship sessions have been hosted to introduce elementary students to STEM careers at an early age.
•  Over 500 grade 2 – 5 students in 20 classrooms engaged through the Chemical Education Foundation.
•  Chemical Education Foundation provided science project kits, impacting 11 classrooms in grades 2 – 5 at  

Emerson Elementary.

MOZAMBIQUE

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

28

•  1 200 science kits with essential supplies for learners in Temane and Mangungumete Primary Schools.
•  Delivery of 400 desks in several schools from Govuro and Inhassoro to improve conditions of learning to kids without desks 

in these districts.

•  The inauguration of the Inhassoro training centre in November 2022 ( SR

 for more information, refer to page 31). 

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESGROWING SHARED VALUE – SASOL IN SOCIETYGROWING SHARED VALUE // Sasol in Society // Community environmental programme

OUR GROUP 
APPROACH

Our community environmental programme is aimed at:

    Improving the quality of life, facilitating better access to community services and improving 
health outcomes linked to environmental risks; and
    Assisting learners, educators and the community at large to understand the connection 
between environment and economic opportunities and our dependency on the environment. 

   In Qatar, Sasol received an Appreciation Award at the 10th Qatar 
Corporate Social Responsibility Summit.
   In South Africa, Sasol collected 120 139 tons of recyclable waste.
   In Mozambique, Sasol provided 1 200 science kits to Temane 
and Mangugumete Primary Schools.

FEATURE STORY

OUTCOMES

South Africa
Our community environment programme deals 
with education, street clean-up, waste 
collections and recycling in Govan Mbeki and 
Metsimaholo Local Municipalities. In FY23, we:

•  Reached 3 769 households through house-to-

house education and awareness;

•  Educated and raised awareness about waste 
management, water conservation, air quality, 
biodiversity and sustainable food system 
at five schools in eMbalenhle, Secunda and 
Lebohang;

•  Planted 1 350 spekboom, 200 indigenous 

trees and six fruit trees in Leandra, Kinross, 
Bethal and Charl Cilliers;

•  Collected a massive 120 139 tons of 

recyclable waste;

•  Welcomed 3 075 new beneficiaries to the 

‘Swop Shop’ programme in Secunda;

•  Transformed 12 illegal dump sites into food 

gardens in Metsimaholo Municipality; and

•  Implemented a water saving project to 

raise awareness and promote water saving 
behaviours in Metsimaholo communities.  
The project targets 10 000 households 
and 28 schools and employed a local plumber 
and 10 water warriors.

Qatar
In our educational and environment programme, 
we revitalised our online presence through a 
website and mobile application upgrade, while 
undertaking an extensive auditing process 
resulting in an increase in the number of users 
on the:

•  Accessible Qatar website by more than 70 000; 

and

•  Sasol e-Nature website by more than 100 000.

North America
Partnered with the city of Lake Charles to reopen 
Tuten Park after 32 months of park closure due 
to the COVID-19 pandemic and multiple 
hurricanes.

Hosted six events for the relaunched Nature in 
Focus educational programme at Tuten and 
Riverside Parks. Over 500 community members 
have attended the programme’s events.

Relaunched the 1 000 Trees in 1 000 Days region-
wide social investment initiative and planted 
over 175 trees within the first two events.

At Sasol Qatar, we prioritise partnerships. 
We will continue to deliver our activities in 
collaboration with government, civil society 
and other partners to ensure that our 
offerings remain relevant, aligned with the 
United Nations Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) and in support of the Qatar 
National Vision 2030.

In May 2023, Sasol Qatar was happy to 
participate in the 10th season of the Qatar 
CSR National Programme at Qatar University. 
This was held under the patronage of 
H.E. Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman 
bin Jassim Al Thani, Prime Minister and 
Minister of Foreign Affairs. The event 
provided a perfect platform for Sasol Qatar 
to engage within the community and build 
bridges with old and new stakeholders. 

Our participation included an interactive 
exhibition of our main initiatives to date, as 
well as highlights of our commitment to the 
SDGs. Visitors were able to explore one of 
Sasol Qatar’s flagship sustainability projects 
with an exploration of the secret life 
of plants.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

29

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESGROWING SHARED VALUE – SASOL IN SOCIETYGROWING SHARED VALUE // Sasol in Society // Bridge-to-work programme 

OUR GROUP 
APPROACH

Skills development plays a pivotal role in creating 
sustainable livelihoods and driving both the formal 
and informal economies globally. We have seen a 
need to improve the standard of training due to the 
extraordinary challenges presented by the COVID-19 

pandemic for skills development systems. It not only forced a rethink of future skills required 
but also how these skills will be accessed by the youth.
The trainings offered lead to enhanced economic opportunities in our fenceline communities.
We offer targeted interventions that provide youth with core skills, technical, vocational 
and work readiness training which enables them to become self-sustainable and positive 
contributors to local and national economies.

TARGETED INTERVENTIONS

Enabling youth employment
Prioritise development interventions 
that are linked to local community 
value chain services such as plumbing, 
electrification and tiling.
Business skills training
Training of the unemployed aligned to 
economic activity.

Technical and Vocational Education 
and Training-to-work skills
Commercialising technical skills to enable 
sustainable income earning.

Provision of starter pack/trade tools
Beneficiaries graduate and receive starter 
kits depending on discipline to enable 
sustainable income generating activities.

Small business 
development
Capacitating 
entrepreneurs 
through business 
development that 
enables them to 
set up sustainable 
enterprises.

OUTCOMES

South Africa
•  Iphepe successfully trained 
and mentored 164 people in 
agricultural skills, livestock, 
vegetable and poultry 
production.

•  43 youth from Zamdela 
trained for employment 
during shutdown activities 
in Sasolburg Operations.

•  34 traffic point duty officers 

were recruited to improve 
community safety in 
eMbalenhle, Trichardt and 
Secunda.

•  We collaborated with the Small 
Enterprise Development Agency 
to showcase more than 40 
entrepreneurs from KwaZulu-
Natal at a pop-up market.

•  42 welders completed 

structural welding training 
and 12 welders completed a 
tungsten inert gas module.

•  19 young people from Govan 
Mbeki Municipality have been 
trained/skilled in garment 
making through Gert Sibande 
technical, vocational education 
and training college.

Mozambique
•  500 beneficiaries were trained 

in entrepreneurship, with 
250 receiving funding for new 
businesses.

•  In Inhassoro District, 32 young 

people (50% women) were 
trained in electrical and 
plumbing basics.

•  In our Employment and Skills 
for Development programme:
•  159 people trained in 

short-duration courses for 
agro-processing, cookery, 
electrical work and plumbing;

•  231 graduates attended 

the workshop on preparing 
to enter the job market; 

•  58 people secured 

employment (34 male 
and 24 female); and

•  32 graduates secured 
internships (18 male 
and 14 female).

North America
The Louisiana Small Business 
Development Center at McNeese 
State University in Lake Charles 
offers confidential consulting and 
business training to existing and 
potential small business owners 
in the Southwest Louisiana area 
at no cost. Sasol is one of the 
centre’s largest corporate 
sponsors. During the year the 
programme:

•  Counselled over 500 distinctive 
clients and 40 industry-related 
clients; and 

•  Supported over ten local 

businesses in successfully 
completing a development 
programme, resulting in the 
acquisition of $40,000 in 
business grants.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

30

FEATURE STORY

Tsholofelo Mokwele, an emerging farmer from 
Ekangala, Gauteng North, has conquered youth 
unemployment to become an influential individual 
in her community. She has contributed immensely 
in changing the narrative about youth in the 
agricultural industry.

Her life-changing journey started after attending 
the Sasol Bridge-to-Work farmer development 
programme. She took her grandparents’ farm and 
transformed it into a flourishing agricultural 
enterprise, whilst putting the knowledge and skills 
acquired during the Iphepe Farmer Development 
Programme into good use. 

Tsholofelo registered a business which has a 
diverse suite of agricultural products which include, 
amongst others; vegetables, broilers, cattle and 
goats. Tsholofelo said, “The programme provided 
me with practical agriculture and business skills 
including information on how to start and 
operationalise a business with a specific focus 
on record-keeping and efficient administration.” 
She says this has helped her to manage her small 
business into one which is growing. 

Tsholofelo is combating youth unemployment and 
cultivating a sense of community pride by 
employing eight individuals. Her 470-hectare land 
includes livestock such as six cattle, 30 goats and 
six sheep, as well as 200 broiler population. In 
addition, she grows seasonal vegetables such as 
Swiss chard, tomatoes, onions and green peppers.

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESGROWING SHARED VALUE – SASOL IN SOCIETYGROWING SHARED VALUE // Sasol in Society // Community health and service infrastructure programme

OUR GROUP 
APPROACH

Sasol’s community development programmes are premised on the needs of those 
closest to our fenceline communities and guided by our desire to strengthen 
relationships with our stakeholders and regulators, which is a material matter. 

While we recognise that it is not 
the primary role of Sasol to provide 
municipal services, it is often the 
most marginalised members of a 
community that are impacted by 
lack of access to service delivery. 
As a partner in the many regions in 
which we operate (particularly in 

South Africa and Mozambique), we 
understand that we have a role to 
play in supporting and collaborating 
with local government efforts to 
create an enabling environment 
in which both communities and 
businesses can thrive. This is the 
reason we invest in:

    Infrastructure development;
    Health and wellness programmes 
for healthier communities who will 
be productive and in turn contribute 
positively to society; and
    Disability programmes.

OUTCOMES

South Africa
•  Over 1,6 million young people reached 

through the HIV/AIDS education and 
awareness campaign implemented in the 
Durban South Basin, in KwaZulu-Natal. 
The platform used to reach them included 
in-person, social and broadcast media.

•  Completed significant building and repairs 
of water and sanitation infrastructures in 
flood-affected schools in KwaZulu-Natal.

•  Partnered with Pink Drive and the 

Department of Health to conduct wellness 
screenings and cancer awareness, in 
Katlehong, Bethal, eMbalenhle, Leandra, 
Zamdela, Refengkgotso (Deneysville) 
and Ekangala.

•  Renewable energy solar infrastructure 

solutions were installed in six Metsimaholo 
community health centres to provide 
uninterrupted health services and mitigate 
adverse impact of loadshedding.
•  Completed the maintenance and 

improvement of the Komatipoort Clinic 
as well as the Cromati Combined School.

•  Commenced full rehabilitation of a 8.8km 

key access road to Zamdela which will 
enhance economic activity, improve the 
daily lives of road users and employed 
77 people.

•  Sasolburg and Ekandustria implemented 

22 community health and service 
infrastructure projects, supported 
local businesses and created 358 job 
opportunities.

•  The eye testing project partnership 

between Sasol, St John Ambulance Services 
Eye Clinic and the Department of Health 
Free State provides eye testing and 
spectacles to senior citizens and people 
living with disabilities.

•  Careswell Children’s Project is a centre 
that supports vulnerable and orphaned 
children in Iraq, Zamdela. Sasol funded 
the construction of a new building to 
ensure that the centre operates in a safe 
environment and bring dignity to children.

Mozambique
•  Completed the construction of the 

Inhassoro Vocational Training Centre and 
handed it over.

•  Completed construction of Inhassoro 

multipurpose field. Features include an 
11-a-side football field; a multipurpose 
area; player changing rooms; public toilets; 
seating stands for 1 000 people; a water 
supply system; and a perimeter fence.

•  Sasol works with 37 communities to 

improve water and sanitation infrastructure 

in these communities. The programme 
is implemented by the Netherlands 
Development Organisation (SNV). The 
programme aims to improve access to clean 
water, enhance sustainability of supply 
systems, promote hygiene and sanitation 
and prevent water contamination.

•  SNV continues construction of public 
toilets and water systems as part of 
the programme.

•  Programme achievements to date include 
rehabilitating 74 boreholes, rehabilitating 
eight water supply systems, constructing 
nine new water supply systems, equipping 
ten holes with manual and rehabilitated 
pumps and establishing 23 new manual 
pump sources.

•  As part of the water program, 110 

water committees have been created 
or revitalised in the covered districts, 
fostering community involvement and 
ownership.

Qatar
•  The Sasol Qatar team and Qatar’s Ministry 
of Social Development and Family entered 
a partnership to collaborate on the 
Accessible Qatar initiative including the 
Definitely Able initiatives to support people 
with disabilities.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

31

FEATURE STORY

Inauguration of the Inhassoro Training Centre
In November 2022, Mozambican President H.E. Filipe Nyusi 
inaugurated the Vocational Training Centre in the Inhassoro 
District, Inhambane Province. The centre comprises of five 
classrooms with capacity for 20 students each; three workshops 
for practical lessons; and a residential block made up of six 
houses for staff. The centre is fully furnished and equipped 
with state-of-the-art technology and includes an administration 
block, a playing field, water supply systems, a warehouse 
and other support infrastructure. Construction of the project 
started in 2019 and is illustrative of Sasol’s commitment 
to Mozambique’s economic and social development.

Sasol has partnered with the Alberto Cassimo Institute for 
Training and Labour Studies since 2015.

At the inauguration, Sasol President and CEO Fleetwood Grobler 
said: "This initiative is a simple contribution to the efforts of the 
Government of Mozambique in reducing youth unemployment 
and to meet the needs of structural change in the labour market."

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESGROWING SHARED VALUE – SASOL IN SOCIETYGROWING SHARED VALUE // Sasol in Society // Sasol for Good

OUR GROUP 
APPROACH

We encourage our employees to get involved in their communities by volunteering their time, 
skills and resources through company and employee-initiated social development causes. 
By doing so we leverage the considerable, diverse abilities and expertise of our employees as 
volunteers in causes that empower fenceline communities and co-create sustainable livelihoods. 

Causes benefit from employee giving, whilst employees are enriched with a greater understanding of community issues, which makes 
them advocates on those issues. We also support NGO capacity building and philanthropic giving to support community NGOs.
Through ‘Sasol for Good’, we give our employees 40 hours of paid leave per annum in which to volunteer. We also complement their 
financial contributions to fundraising initiatives of their choice via payroll deductions by matching gifts and volunteer grants.

OUTCOMES

SOUTH AFRICA

NORTH AMERICA

•  Over 600 employees, including the Sasol Group CEO and other Group Executives, participated in the Mandela Day event, packing over 121 000 meals 

which were distributed to the needy early childhood development centres across the country.

•  About R1,2 million was donated by 286 employees to 109 causes as part of our Sasol for Good Programme. This included Sasol's contribution to 

•  Through the Friendly Neighbour programme, Sasol partnered with 17 franchisee sites and 22 non-profit entities to uplift over 9 000 people in the 

match employee donations.

fields of education, health, infrastructure and safety.

parcels, blankets, mattresses and hygiene packs.

effectiveness and governance compliance. 

•  Sasol Secunda supported flood-affected communities in Nkomazi municipality. 55 villages and four towns received assistance including food 

•  20 Non-profit organisations (NPOs) in Ekandustria completed an NPO incubation programme to build capacity to assist with operational 

•  The Keep a Girl initiative aims to empower the vulnerable girls through the provision of sanitary packs and girls’ hygiene education and awareness. 

The project targets disadvantaged girls in 28 Metsimaholo schools and over 1 400 girl learners benefited from the initiative. 

•  In Ekandustria, we have built strong relationships with local NPOs that render critical psycho-social services to communities. We supported four 

local NPO’s with funding to enhance their operations whilst rendering community support.

•  Sasol mobilised 303 employees in Sasolburg Ekandustria operations to support immediate communities as part of Sasol for Good drive. 54 local 

organisations were supported through various initiatives and 2 664 people benefited. The initiatives included Mandela Day, Stationery Drive, 
World AIDS Day, Winter Warm, Casual Day and Festive Drive.

•  About 70 Sasol Lake Charles employees participated in the 2022 Chem Expo event, where they engaged over 2 100 students in science experiments 

inspired by Sasol products. This is an industry-led science experiment showcase.

•  Over 250 employees volunteered throughout 19 community initiatives, totalling to more than 750 volunteer hours.
•  Chemicals America hosted the second annual Community Week, which is dedicated to benefiting neighbouring communities through company 
and employee-directed engagements. Over 600 Sasol employees participated in various community events, creating 800 Science, Technology, 
Engineering and Mathematics kits for our Partner in Education schools and contributing over $35 000 through SasolGIVES, an online matching 
contributions programme per employee.

•  Over $100 000 in charitable contributions made through Sasol’s employee matching contributions programme this year.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

32

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESGROWING SHARED VALUE – SASOL IN SOCIETYSasol entered into a partnership with Wheelchair Basketball South Africa 16 years ago – a strong and 
mutually-beneficial relationship that delivers high performance athletes that achieve excellence.  
The support by Sasol enables an inclusive culture by supporting people that are differently abled, also 
ensuring the individuals represent South Africa at the global stage, where they are exhibiting the 
indomitable spirit that nothing is impossible.

The South African Men’s U/23 Wheelchair Basketball team represented Africa at the 2022 International 
wheelchair basketball federation (IWBF) Men’s U/23 World Championship. The Sasol-sponsored 
AmaWheelaBoys successfully participated in this global tournament in the city of Phuket, Thailand gaining 
valuable experience which is a positive gain for the wheelchair basketball value chain in South Africa. 
The IWBF U/25 Women’s Wheelchair Basketball World Championship Qualifiers took place between  
5 – 8 December 2022 at the Mandeville Sports Centre, Johannesburg. The Sasol U/25 AmaWheelie Girls 
national team hosted the Republic Democratic of Congo and Ethiopia and won the tournament without a 
single loss. The South African team will represent Africa at 2023 IWBF U25 Women’s Wheelchair Basketball 
World Championship in Bangkok, Thailand.

The South African Senior Men’s and Women’s Wheelchair Basketball teams qualified to participate in  
the Inaugural African Para Games which will be held in Accra, Ghana in September 2023. The extensive 
selection and training camps held during the first half of 2023 will be put to test for the South African teams 
at this tournament, given that the mandate of the coaching staff was to revamp the High-Performance teams 
to bring them in line with the required standards of International Wheelchair Basketball.

GROWING SHARED VALUE // Sasol in Society // Development sponsorships

WOMEN’S FOOTBALL 

WHEELCHAIR BASKETBALL

Sasol has been the pre-eminent brand behind women’s football for the past 14 years in South Africa. 
Our partnership with the South African Football Association (SAFA) is fuelled by a shared belief in the 
boundless potential of women’s football.

In 2009, we decided to shift our support towards the development of the women’s game, with the aim 
of enhancing the quality of women’s football nationwide, starting from grassroots initiatives through the 
Sasol League, extending all the way up to the national team. 

Our goal is to empower young women, enabling them to improve their lives through the transformative 
power of sports. 

We have witnessed many of our athletes evolve from the Sasol League, the crucible of women’s football 
development, to competing at international football clubs. This speaks volumes for the impact that Sasol’s 
partnership with SAFA has on women’s football in the country.

OUTCOMES

SASOL BANYANA BANYANA

SASOL LEAGUE

Banyana Banyana qualified to participate in the 
2023 FIFA Women’s World Cup, the pinnacle 
global women’s football event.

Banyana Banyana’s inaugural participation in 
the 2019 FIFA Women’s World Cup was a 
monumental achievement. However, the 2023 
tournament holds even greater significance, as 
they compete as the reigning Women’s Africa 
Cup of Nations champions. This accomplishment 
stands as a testament to the team’s incredible 
journey and Sasol’s unwavering support. 
Banyana Banyana has been drawn in Group G 
which consist of strong teams such as Argentina, 
Italy and Sweden, to showcase their strength, 
skill and steadfast spirit to create a legacy that 
will inspire generations to come. 

During FY23, Banyana Banyana were crowned 
as the African Champions in Morocco and 
also played international friendly games 
against Brazil, Serbia, Australia and Botswana. 
The team also participated in the 2022 COSAFA 
Tournament and the 2023 Turkey Women’s Cup.

The 2022 Sasol League National Championship 
was held, 17 – 23 October 2022 at the Old 
Peter Mokaba stadium in Polokwane, Limpopo. 
This tournament continues to be a spectacle of 
good football and young ladies chasing their 
dreams of playing in professional leagues, both 
in South Africa and overseas. The tournament 
was a success, with spectators being allowed 
to attend after COVID-19. The incredible growth 
of the women’s game is not just evident in the 
quality of football being played, but teams also 
uphold a highly professional and competitive 
demeanour throughout the tournament. 
Limpopo-based Copperbelt Ladies FC was 
crowned as the 2022 Sasol League National 
Champions.

The 2023 Sasol League season, consisting 
of approximately 140 teams across the nine 
provinces of South Africa, commenced over 
the February/March period. Women’s football 
fixtures are being played every weekend until 
September/October each year.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

33

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESGROWING SHARED VALUE – SASOL IN SOCIETYGROWING SHARED VALUE // Sasol in Society // Centre for shared value management

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
We see ourselves as a force for good and our shared 
value partnership approach is core to contributing to 
UN Sustainable Development Goal 17 and to the role 
we play in our communities.

OUR GROUP APPROACH

We regard creating shared value as an enabler of our 
Purpose and strategy. It contributes to strengthening 
relationships with stakeholders and regulators, which is 
one of Sasol’s material matters. Our Centre for Shared Value 
Management (CSVM) helps us to realise our shared value 
aspirations by:
    Facilitating the creation of socio-economic value for the 
Sasol ecosystem by leveraging partnering opportunities 
and collaborating with stakeholders;

PERFORMANCE

    Attracting and galvanising partners to leverage 
funding and execute sustainable socio-economic value 
programmes for our fenceline communities; and
    Serving as the single point of contact for the integration 
and coordination of Sasol’s group-wide just transition 
initiatives as we progress on our decarbonisation journey.

The changing energy landscape in South Africa affects not only 
the business but also stakeholders such as employees. The Ntsika 
entrepreneur development programme is an indicator of our 
commitment to the just transition process. We have also 
established the just transition office to facilitate effective 
communication, collaboration and decision-making associated 
with this process.

The CSVM within the Just Transition Office leverages existing plans 
and programmes to identify ‘no-regret’ opportunities; achieve 
economies of scale; and create greater value than the individual 
just transition programmes alone could deliver. 

To address the potential negative impacts on jobs of our 
decarbonisation pathways, the CSVM determined several levers 
Sasol (and other stakeholders) can use. By examining 
interventions used in mine closures and reviewing the actions 
of our peers, we identified five main categories of levers. 
These levers show promise in terms of impact, scalability and 
applicability and include:

•  Facilitating job creation (internal and external);
•  Facilitating access to jobs (e.g. career concierge services);
•  Upskill and re-skill individuals to take on new job opportunities;
•  Exploring financial support mechanisms; and
•  Providing well being support.

Ahead of defining more specific levers, the intention is to identify the 
most suitable employment sectors and skillsets required to mitigate 
the impact on our people. Once developed, we can then identify the 
exact levers that will need to be pulled.

Sasol recognises the importance of localisation and economic 
diversification to South Africa’s economic growth and energy 
transition. Partnering with our stakeholders is vital for the 
achievement of a just and equitable transition, particularly so, 
given the complexity of the challenge in South Africa. A collaborative 
approach is warranted to achieve economies of scale needed for 
meaningful impact. Available funding, skills and capacity within other 
companies and the public sector to address these challenges are 
amplified when we collaborate to realise impact beyond the means 
of the individual participants.

To date, we are leveraging partnerships with Impact Catalyst and 
business formations, government agencies and structures, state 
owned enterprises and other companies in the private sector.

Together, we can create a more resilient and inclusive society that 
embraces, enables and empowers the vulnerable. We are also 
engaging directly with various other players in the sector and 
leveraging our membership of industry associations to foster sectoral 
alignment and identify cross-cutting opportunities for collaboration.

WWW  For more information, refer to www.sasol.com

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

34

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESGROWING SHARED VALUE – SASOL IN SOCIETYGROWING SHARED VALUE // Sasol in Society // Responsible sourcing and procurement

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
At Sasol, we strive for excellence in the sustainable supply and 
delivery of goods, services and products to maximise shared 
value for our organisation and all our stakeholders. We actively 
focus on building robust, mutually beneficial relationships with 
our supply chain stakeholders, by ensuring that we understand, 
translate and proactively deliver on commitments, on time 
and at the required quality and price. We are committed to 
developing our fenceline communities and prioritising 
local procurement. 

OUR GROUP APPROACH

We hold our suppliers to the same standard that we hold ourselves. Our approach towards economic 
growth entails embracing principles of sustainability through socially and environmentally responsible 
procurement practices. It also includes fostering fenceline community growth; finding opportunities for 
local manufacturing; and targeting procurement with historically disadvantaged groups. Sound principles 
and governance processes underpin our integrated approach.

   Procurement of renewables from independent power suppliers.
   Five-year local content development partnership underway 
with the Mozambican government.
  Zero tolerance to bribery and corruption.

TARGETED INTERVENTIONS

PALM OIL AND RENEWABLE FEEDSTOCKS

Sasol produces a limited quantity of products using sustainably sourced raw materials including palm and coconut oil 
derivatives. As a member of the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO), Sasol has implemented a RSPO mass-balance 
certification for all related production sites. Furthermore, a Palm Oil Policy is in place which was updated in FY23, specifying 
requirements for the traceability of related products.

We have also implemented an International Sustainability and Carbon Certification (ISCC) supply chain certification for selected 
products to broaden our product portfolio with sustainability credentials. This mass balance certification allows us to procure 
selected non-palm-derived feedstocks with sustainability credentials and offer certified ISCC PLUS products to our customers.

RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY 
PROCUREMENT

CONFLICT MINERALS

PROCUREMENT OF BANNED 
AND RESTRICTED SUBSTANCES

The procurement of renewable 
electricity from Independent Power 
Producers and wheeling it over the 
Eskom grid to our South African 
Operations will contribute 
significantly to the achievement 
of the Sasol target to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions.
CCR

 Refer to the CCR page 38

Sasol makes an annual submission 
as part of our United States Securities 
and Exchange Commission filing in 
terms of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street 
Reform and Consumer Protection Act 
68 of 2008, on our use of any of the 
four minerals that have been linked 
to conflict in African countries 
(known as conflict minerals).

We screen all orders for inbound 
chemicals and materials to be used 
in Southern African operations 
to ensure that we do not procure 
illegal or banned substances. 
Where substances are restricted 
or controlled, permits are in place 
and are managed by our Product 
Stewardship function, to ensure 
adherence to all related requirements.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

35

FY23 OUTCOMES
EcoVadis silver, gold and platinum scores for the Sasol Chemicals 
procurement team in the Eurasia region. Our Italy business achieved a 
70% score for the Sustainable Procurement section of the assessment.

Sasol hosted a ‘SME Sustainability Summit’ in South-Africa.

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESGROWING SHARED VALUE – SASOL IN SOCIETYGROWING SHARED VALUE // Sasol in Society // Responsible sourcing and procurement CONTINUED

ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION

ZERO TOLERANCE FOR UNETHICAL BEHAVIOUR, 
BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION

PERFORMANCE

Sasol aims to achieve a diverse, transformed, 
sustainable and high-performing supplier base 
by accelerating and supporting the development 
of small to medium enterprises (SME).

Sasol Italy has always focused on the search for 
and creation of solid and mutually beneficial 
relationships with third-party companies, 
ensuring an understanding of each other’s needs 
while respecting policies of fairness and congruity 
of prices. Underlying Sasol Italy’s approach are 
sound principles and robust governance 
processes, which ensure the effective application 
of shared values in order to act ethically honouring 
commercial commitments.

Sasol’s presence in Mozambique over the years 
has been a driver of socio-economic development 
through our investments and operations. A key 
aspect of this has been enabled through Sasol’s 
commitment to local content. 

We partnered with the Government of 
Mozambique to develop a five-year local content 
plan for the financial years 2020 to 2024 and 
recently reviewed this.

In South Africa: we embrace the principles 
of sustainability through socially and 
environmentally responsible practices, while 
fostering local economic growth, innovation 
and sustainable job creation. We have developed 
SME programmes to promote the economic 
participation of the local community.

SR

 Refer to page 37: Economic inclusion

We proactively assess human rights, both at our 
operations and at suppliers. We address 
employee non-compliance appropriately in line 
with our disciplinary codes. We encourage all our 
suppliers and stakeholders to ‘speak up’ against 
any suspicious unethical and economic crime 
activities to ensure that both Sasol and our 
suppliers adhere to the provisions and principles 
of ethical sourcing and procurement. We develop 
and inform suppliers on environmental, social 
and governance requirements.

Ethical interaction in day-to-day cooperation 
with all suppliers is still of utmost importance 
and suppliers are required to operate within the 
ethical and legal parameters stipulated in the 
Sasol Supplier Code of Conduct as well as the 
Anti-bribery and Corruption (ABAC) and business 
human rights policies. To continue the fight 
against economic crime, we have shared these 
minimum requirements in two separate training 
modules on the Sasol Supplier Management 
Ethics available on our website: 

WWW  www.sasol.com/suppliers/ethics

We continued to regularly communicate with 
suppliers on ethics, ABAC and BHR to emphasise 
the importance of compliance with these legal 
requirements. We also implemented a risk 
analysis process for BHR. This is now part of the 
supplier application and compliance process.

Economic transformation
In South Africa:
•  We increased our spending with 100% Black-
owned Small, Medium and Micro Enterprises 
(SMMEs), by more than 40% in Secunda and 
Sasolburg;

•  We provided funding of R98 million to 19 suppliers;
•  We spent R38,8 million developing suppliers;
•  We actively track our spend with SMMEs. 

In FY23, we spent R13,4 billion with 1 305 SMME 
suppliers. This represents 19% of our Preferential 
Procurement spend;

•  The private sector is supporting the South African 

government’s localisation drive and has committed 
to a R250 billion public/private localisation 
partnership over the next five years. Of this, 
Sasol has committed to deliver R680 million. 
So far, we have delivered R233 million via import 
replacements and have a number of long-term 
projects in place; and

•  Our preferential procurement statistics include 

spending of R41,7 billion with Black-owned 
businesses and R28,5 billion with Black women-
owned businesses.

In Italy:
•  In Augusta, we spent €23,6 million with local 

suppliers, a 39% increase.

In Mozambique:
•  For FY23, Sasol exceeded its local content 

commitments for power purchase agreement 
(PPA) operations by more than US$6 million 
(actual US$35,8 million versus a target of 
US$29,6 million), representing 91% of the 
total spend with local suppliers;

•  We have an enterprise and supplier development 
(ESD) programme and a SMME development fund, 
specifically for companies based in Inhambane;

•  138 Mozambique-owned companies, represented 

by more than 200 people, already participated 
in our ESD programme;

•  We disbursed more than US$1,2 million to 

41 SMME, of which 11 are women-owned;

•  We exceeded the local content targets for the 

Production Sharing Agreement area, with 82%  
 

of the US$257,4 million in awards to date 
having been awarded to Mozambique registered 
and owned companies;

•  A certification (ISO9001:2015) programme 

was developed. 30 companies will be enrolled 
on the certification programme by the end of 
FY25. Five companies, of which three are from 
Inhambane, have been selected for the 1st phase; 
and

•  Spend with Mozambican companies have improved 

since the previous drilling campaign. To date, 
the spend amounts to US$550,1 million with local 
companies, representing 95% of Mozambican 
companies.

Ethics and compliance
•  In FY23, the number of South African-based 
suppliers trained on ethics and compliance 
increased to 3 542, or 66% of our registered 
suppliers. In addition to the 3 287 ABAC 
risk assessments completed, 1 047 BHR risk 
assessments were concluded.

•  For the Eurasian operations, we started BHR 
due diligence of suppliers representing 80% 
of Eurasian spend.

•  We disqualified seven suppliers where evidence 
of Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment 
fronting was found.

Renewable Electricity procurement
To date, we have signed six PPAs: 
•  Three onshore wind projects totalling 360MW and 
two solar photo-voltaic projects totalling 218MW 
wheeling electricity to Secunda;

CCR

 Refer to CCR page 38 for more information

•  After signing the PPA in January 2023, construction 

began on the 69MW Msenge Emoyeni Wind Farm 
near Bedford, Eastern Cape. The project reached 
financial close in March 2023. It is the first utility-
scale private wind farm in South Africa that will 
wheel its power across the national electricity grid; 
and

•  Eurasian Operations concluded a number of PPAs 

to drive CO2 reduction. 

CCR

  Refer to CCR page 38 for more information

WWW  For more information, refer to www.sasol.com

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

36

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESGROWING SHARED VALUE – SASOL IN SOCIETYGROWING SHARED VALUE // Sasol in Society // Economic inclusion

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
At Sasol, we acknowledge the socio-economic need to proactively develop, support 
and contribute to the sustainability of small, medium and micro enterprises (SMMEs) 
as well as firms owned by historically disadvantaged persons (HDPs), particularly in 
the areas where we operate. We leverage our supply chain to advance this 
transformation imperative, thereby ensuring the integration of SMMEs and HDP-
owned firms into the mainstream of our business. 

OUR GROUP 
APPROACH

We strive to deliver maximum shared value for our organisation and our stakeholders 
that is built on robust, mutually beneficial relationships. This is achieved by supporting 
smaller businesses, through funding and development interventions, enabling their 
meaningful participation within our supply chain. Further, we drive localisation and economic 
transformation of large enterprises in our supplier base to create more opportunities for the 
integration of small businesses in our fenceline communities.
We recognise the socio-economic challenges faced by many, especially by women and the 
youth, levels of unemployment in our fenceline communities and that entrepreneurship helps 
to alleviate poverty.

PERFORMANCE

Our objective is to foster local economic growth, innovation and sustainable job creation in our 
communities. We aim to achieve this by creating an enabling environment through strategic initiatives 
and target setting.

BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT IMPACT

R38.8 million Small to 

Medium Enterprises (SME) 

development spend

9 SMEs 

demonstrated 
revenue growth

FUNDING IMPACT

Grant Funding of R924 000 
11 beneficiaries supported

4 Supplier Connect Events 

5 market access event opportunities for SMEs such as Exhibitions

201 jobs created from interventions

38 SME training interventions

191 small businesses under development

Improvement on loan funding performance FY23 

 – approved funding R98,5 million, up from R18 million in FY22

New entrants funded 13

Updated Interest rate saving  

due to Siyakha’s lower interest rates 

R23,7 million

Siyakha loan book R619 million 
47 beneficiaries on the loan book

Revenue growth as a result of 

funding interventions 18%

FY23 Temporary and permanent jobs 

created from Siyakha funding interventions

859 jobs created                     2050 jobs sustained

OUR INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT APPROACH IS CENTRED AROUND AN INCLUSIVE 
ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION IMPERATIVE

SUPPORT

INCLUDE

TRANSFORM

Develop smaller enterprises

Embrace smaller enterprises

Drive empowerment within 

the suppliers base

Find, connect and develop  

new small suppliers

Include SMEs into supply  

chain and grow

Scale and transform 

Set aside in 
procurement 
categories

Category 
integration 

Connect 

Transact

Create awareness 

Scale 

Develop

Transform 
existing 
suppliers 

Industrial new 

suppliers

Preferential 

contract 
terms

Shared 

infrastructure 

Business 
support

Market 
access

Capability 
building

Funding

Product/
service 
delivery

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

37

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESGROWING SHARED VALUE – SASOL IN SOCIETYGROWING SHARED VALUE // Sasol in Society // Economic inclusion CONTINUED

Fostering economic growth

The current economic environment characterised by high interest rates and inflation, loadshedding and a market that is still recovering from COVID-19, presents SMEs with numerous challenges, hampering their ability to 
generate profits. Many small businesses struggle to secure adequate financing once they have received purchase orders as they do not have the necessary financial records. Sasol introduced various interventions in 2023 
to support SMEs. These were aimed at addressing business failures and high levels of unemployment.

1

FENCELINE COMMUNITY PROJECT

1

FUNDING DIVERSIFICATION PROJECT

2

TRANSPORTER DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME

2

POST-INVESTMENT SUPPORT

Economic Inclusion 

Programmes

3

3D PRINTING

4

SASOL SME SUSTAINABILITY SUMMIT

Financial Inclusion 

Programmes

3

FINANCIAL EXCELLENCE

4

TURNAROUND SPECIALIST

5

EKANDUSTRIA BUSINESS CENTRE

5

PITCHING EVENT

Set aside opportunities are identified for SMEs and development programmes. In collaboration with various development 
partners, 38 SMEs have been onboarded against a target of 35. Thus far, over R1 million has been invested in the 
Fenceline Community Project and this will continue into FY24.

In FY23, the range of funding options was broadened providing market friendly solutions for SMEs, which includes 
interest free loans and blended commercial deals. This enhances the capabilities of SMEs to fulfil their contractual 
obligations effectively and alleviate the burden of early-stage loan repayments, thus fostering growth opportunities.

1

2

3

4

5

Launched to assist SMEs in the transport industry with challenges such as regulatory compliance issues, security 
concerns, limited access to infrastructure, unstable fuel prices, health and safety risks, this programme will run for a 
period up to 18 months informed by the practical application of each entity and mentorship will continue for a period 
of up to three years. The first cohort of seven transporters have been onboarded of which three are Women-Owned 
and three Youth-Owned. R1,4 million has been invested in FY23 and will continue into the new year and beyond.

Four Youth Owned and an additional two 100% Black-Owned businesses have been taken through a basic skills 
development programme focused on 3D printing, hosted at our Sasolburg Incubation Centre. The training programme 
covered creative problem solving, critical thinking, project management, design and printing to create 3D models. 
During the current financial year, R589 000 has been invested in the 3D Printing phase one programme.

The Sasol SME Sustainability Summit is a three-part series of masterclasses through which we aim to demystify 
foundation topics within sustainability, renewable energy and the just energy transition and to explore them in 
collaboration with key role players in the ecosystem with the intent to identify meaningful opportunities for SME 
participation in the emerging energy economy. We realigned our enterprise and supplier development agenda around the 
principles of ESG and Sustainable Development Goals which will take place in three parts, each focusing on E, S and the G.

In order to improve access to business enablement facilities for SMEs, we are currently supporting a cohort of three 
internet cafe SMEs located in Ekandustria. Our goal is to enhance the quality of their business offerings by addressing 
the current lack of well-functioning internet cafes in the area. To support these entrepreneurs, R1 million has been 
invested in Self-powered Mobile Business Centres, powered by batteries and solar energy, ensuring uninterrupted 
operation enabling sustainable operations.

1

2

3

4

5

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

38

A dedicated post investment support programme, proactively identifying challenges to trigger relevant financial support 
timeously. 16 beneficiaries benefited from one-on-one mentorship programme and seven from an Advisory Board. The 
programme support covers strategy review and implementation, leadership development and detailed financial support.

We have contracted the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants, as a development partner to launch the 
Enterprise development programme, which advocates for and brings awareness to the importance of financial excellence 
in running, managing and growing a sustainable business. The programme aims to reach 90 beneficiaries and the 
onboarding has kicked off and will run for an initial period of 12 months.

A business turn around strategist has been contracted to assist small business to navigate the current complex economic 
landscape. This will assist SMEs grappling with financial distress, operational challenges and uncertain futures. A total of 
R900 000 was invested to support SMEs.

The Founders of the Women-In-Engineering Programme presented their elevator pitches to a panel of judges comprising 
of Sasol engineering contractors (EC) Partners and the Sasol Procurement Team. The top three won cash prizes to the 
value of R255 000, accessing finance to grow their businesses. The pitching also enabled the founders to be visible to 
audience member which created a business opportunity.

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESGROWING SHARED VALUE – SASOL IN SOCIETYGROWING SHARED VALUE // Sasol in Society // Economic inclusion CONTINUED

1

WOMEN-FOCUSED DEVELOPMENT

1

PLASTIC AND ASH TO BRICKS

FEATURE STORY 

Gender-specific 

programmes

Recognising the importance 
of achieving gender equality 

and fostering inclusive 

progress, women’s economic 
empowerment emerges as 
an indispensable catalyst for 

transformative change.

2

PPE UPCYCLING

Responsible 

consumption and 

production

1

During FY23:

completed; 

•  The first cohort of the Women-in-Engineering incubation programme was 

•  Twelve of the 15 founders of the programme (whose scope of work is linked 

to mining) participated in the ‘Investing in African Mining Indaba’ in an effort 
to develop opportunities to access the market;

•  We invested R726 000 in support of SME participation in the Mining Indaba;
•  We spent more than R4 million in support of the development of the 15 founders; 

and

•  Launched the Women in Mining incubation programme, aimed at prioritising 
women’s economic empowerment through training, mentorship, facilitating 
access to financial resources and generating opportunities.

1

2

Aimed at supporting Ramtsilo, a 100% Black female-owned company that utilises 
plastic waste and ash as raw materials to produce eco-friendly bricks.

We assisted four SMEs to set up mini factories, acquire new industrial sewing 
machines and receive training to expand their production operations. We also 
sponsored their attendance at a textile dying course to equip them with the 
knowledge and practical skills to dye material themselves. By utilising Sasol’s used 
personal protective equipment (PPE), these township suppliers will unlock more 
market prospects. During 2023, we invested R400 000 to support the beneficiaries 
of the PPE upcycling project.

RAMTSILO TRADING
Ramtsilo Trading, a manufacturing 
facility that specialises in eco-friendly 
bricks made from recycled plastic waste 
and sand, is undergoing an expansion 
to increase production volumes and 
expand its client base. As a 100% Black 
female-owned company, Ramtsilo 
Trading is committed to promoting 
diversity and sustainability in its 
operations. We have since spent 
R1,3 million in development support 
interventions.

To facilitate this expansion, new 
production facilities have been identified 
and additional brick manufacturing 
equipment has been acquired. In order 
to optimise Ramtsilo’s operational 
efficiency, Sasol has bought a three-ton 
forklift and sponsored Wood SA, 
engineering and project management 
consultancy, to provide support and 
expertise to the Germiston 
manufacturing plant. As part of this 
process, SHE (Safety, Health and 
Environment) and technical assessments 
have been completed. Further studies, 
including Geotechnical studies, are being 
recommended.

As part of our impact on Sustainable 
Development Goals 7 and 12,  
we joined forces with Ramtsilo to work 
on the Hennops Revival project. 
Together, we worked towards cleaning up 
the Hennops River and making a tangible 
difference in the community, while 
collecting waste for the SME to 
manufacture more environmentally 
friendly plastic bricks.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

39

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESGROWING SHARED VALUE – SASOL IN SOCIETYRESILIENCE IN A LOW-CARBON FUTURE // Climate change

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
We are committed to ensuring sustainability and accelerating our 
progress towards achieving a net zero ambition by 2050. We are 
following an agile approach, offering optionality and flexibility 
in the long term in how we achieve our 2050 ambition. By 2030, 
we aim to decrease absolute scope 1 and 2 greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions by 30% for the Sasol Energy and international 
Chemicals businesses and to reduce scope 3, Category 11 (use of 
sold products) emissions by 20% for Sasol Energy.

OUR GROUP APPROACH

FY23 OUTCOMES
Jointly, with Air Liquide, signed Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) >600MW 
of renewable energy.

 Signed a 69MW 20-year wind energy PPA with the Msenge Emoyeni project 
(currently under construction) for the Sasolburg green hydrogen pilot project.

Received the first solar energy at our Augusta, Italy site from a Virtual Power 
Purchase Agreements (VPPA).

Signed several renewable electricity PPAs for Sasol Italy.

Announced a 50/50 joint venture agreement with Topsoe for the production 
of sustainable aviation fuels (SAF) to exploit our advantaged FT technology 
and Topsoe’s reforming and related technologies.

In South Africa, Sasol is a significant scope 1 and 2 GHG emitter. Although we had made substantial reductions 
in emissions since 2004, in 2019 we set our initial targets, which we built on in 2021 with greater ambition. 
We did so in response to the need to do much more to meet the Agreement's goals. Our 2030 target is a 
foundation to support achievement of our 2050 net zero ambition. Our approach is focused on:
    Implementing a three pillar emission-reduction framework (Reduce, Transform and Shift) housed within 
the Reset, Transition and Reinvent phases of the Future Sasol strategy;
    Seeking strategic partnerships with like-minded organisations to establish new sustainability businesses 
that align with our vision and dedication to promoting decarbonisation and facilitating a just energy 
transition;
     Using existing assets and applying energy and process efficiencies and integrating larger Mega Watts (MWs) 
of renewable energy, reconfiguring assets to use lower- and low-carbon feedstocks such as green hydrogen 
and sustainable carbon; and
    Advocating for coherent and integrated climate policy and a regulatory framework that enables a just and 
equitable transition appropriately paced for the context in which we operate. 

PERFORMANCE

We continue to progress our emission-reduction roadmaps towards achieving a 30% GHG reduction by 2030, despite a challenging 
economic environment. Over the past year, we have been focusing on data integrity. Asset divestments have affected our baseline 
since 2017 when our GHG target was set. As a result, a Sasol GHG Working Team has been preparing position statements, 
procedures and data definitions for the businesses to apply consistent rules in how we count our GHG data and account towards 
our GHG target. In this way, we are advancing and embedding our GHG target-setting principles as contained in the World Business 
Council for Sustainable Development GHG Protocol.

GHG emissions CO2e (kilotons)
Direct scope 1
Indirect scope 2
Indirect scope 3
GHG intensity (CO2 e/ton of product meant for external sale)

2023

58 644
5 748
36 664
4.12

2022

57 284
6 607
37 557
3.86

•  The combined GHG emissions from methane, nitrous oxides and carbon dioxide (scope 1) are quantified as carbon dioxide 

equivalents (CO2e) and recorded as direct scope 1 CO2e emissions. In FY23, we observed an increase in our direct scope 1 CO2e GHG 
emissions. Higher production rates than in 2022 contributed to marginally higher year-on-year emissions. These were anticipated 
and mostly the result of process inefficiencies, external power interruptions and shortage of natural gas, eroding emission 
reductions relative to 2022. This increase was anticipated and consistent with feedback provided in 2022 at Sasol’s Climate 
Change Roundtable. 

•  We acknowledge the importance of decreasing our scope 3 emissions, with a particular emphasis on Category 11, which pertains 
to the use of energy products. These efforts to lower emissions are closely linked to our commitment to creating a Future Sasol 
that prioritises sustainable fuels and chemicals. As we transition towards these lower-carbon alternatives, they will gradually 
replace our current fossil fuel products.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

40

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESRESILIENCE IN A LOW-CARBON FUTURERESILIENCE IN A LOW-CARBON FUTURE // Energy efficiency

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
To continuously improve the Energy Efficiency (EnEf) of all Sasol’s 
manufacturing operations to:
   Save operating costs;
   Contain and reduce the environmental footprint of our 
operations;
   Support national energy conservation initiatives and 
governmental objectives; and
   Support the objectives of the Energy Productivity 100 (EP100) 
initiative.

FY23 OUTCOMES
Winner of the South African Energy Efficiency 
Confederation award for ‘Industrial Corporate Company of 
the Year 2022’ and the International Association of Energy 
Engineers, Sub-Saharan award for ‘Industrial Corporate 
Company of the Year 2023’.

OUR GROUP APPROACH

To improve on Sasol’s EnEf performance we execute practices using the following key measures: 
    Setting realistic and meaningful targets and reporting progress against them; 
    Following internationally acceptable EnEf standards and practices; 
    Ensuring compliance with applicable laws, regulations and corporate requirements; and 
    Utilising EnEf management principles as an integral part of our daily operations. 

   Steady improvement in EnEf performance and production volumes 
for Chemicals Eurasia.
   Use of natural gas from gas sourcing operations (GSO) contributed 
to the improvement of energy efficiency in the second half of FY23.

PERFORMANCE

Our electronic Energy Management System (EnMS) monitors, measures and reports monthly EnEf performance of all 
Operating Platforms/Regional Platforms (OPs/RPs) against targets. This is an addition to the coordination of EnEf 
improvement roadmaps annually to forecast medium and long-term performances in line with our commitment of 
achieving a 30% EnEf improvement by 2030. 

EnEf – Sasol Group (Improvement from 2005 baseline
EnEf – South African based Energy Operations  
(Improvement from 2005 baseline)
Sasol Group Energy Productivity (EP100) – Improvement from 2010 baseline

2023
Actual

13,4%

10,6%
12,4%

2023
Target

23%

23%
19,5%

2022
Actual

18,4%

15,7%
19,1%

In FY23, there was a regression of 5,1% for the Group 
and 5,2% for Energy Operations and Technology from the 
previous financial year. This is due to several challenges 
experienced by our OPs/RPs including operational 
instabilities; external power disruptions; coal supply and 
quality; and natural gas availability.

In the second half of FY23, Group EnEf performance improved 
steadily due to improved plant stabilities and production 
volumes because of:

•  Incremental improvements in coal quality, increased 

equipment availability and improved reliability and 
higher availability of natural gas from the GSO which has 
optimised the power imported from Eskom; 

•  Chemicals Eurasia production volumes and EnEf 

performance have steadily improved from April 2023 
owing to steady market demand; and

•  Steady improvement at Lake Charles Americas average 

net production volumes following the turnaround 
maintenance on some of the units during Quarter two 
of FY23.

Despite these improvements Sasol is still below the EnEf 
target of 23%. The re-establishment of stable plant 
operations in combination with the full implementation 
of our EnEf improvement roadmap up to 2030 will ensure 
the achievement of the 30% EnEf target by 2030.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

41

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESRESILIENCE IN A LOW-CARBON FUTUREMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT // Air quality management 

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
We acknowledge the link between our activities and air quality and the need 
to act responsibly in managing our impacts in the regions in which we operate. 
We have a holistic air quality management approach, which is appropriately 
informed by internationally accepted practices.

OUR GROUP APPROACH

Our SHE policy underpins our risk-based approach to mitigate and improve our atmospheric 
footprint relating to air quality management and ambient air quality improvement.
This includes our ongoing efforts to prevent pollution and enable ambient air quality 
improvement through legal compliance and the application of our duty of care.
We remain committed to engaging and collaborating with our stakeholders on our improvement 
commitments and associated progress. To this end, we participate constructively in policy 
and regulatory development processes as well as in community initiatives. We monitor our 
performance, report to the authorities thereon and disclose appropriately to our stakeholders.

INNOVATIVE SOLUTIONS
We implemented abatement projects that use the 
latest technologies that are compatible with our 
mature plants. Examples include:
•  Co-feeding biosludge to gasification at our 
Secunda Operations (SO) – a stream that is 
currently incinerated is intended to be routed 
to our gasification process where we anticipate 
deriving syngas from biosludge with the objective 
of moving up the waste hierarchy; 

•  Investigating alternative treatment solutions for 

High Organic Water (HOW) at SO – studies are 
in progress investigating routing this stream to 
gasification or bio-basins to divert the stream from 
incineration and improve air quality;

•  Working with third parties solution providers for 
our High Sulfur Pitch waste stream to route the 
stream away from landfill or incineration options; 
and

•  Committing to the continuous reduction 
of emissions and the improvement of air 
quality. To this end we have adopted an 
integrated approach to emission reduction and 
decarbonisation.

ENGAGEMENT WITH AUTHORITIES
We support government's policy and regulatory 
endeavours to improve air quality and we engage 
constructively in this regard at local, provincial and 
national level. We are participating in the development 
of the Highveld Priority Area Air Quality Management 
Plan and the review of Section 21 of the National 
Environmental Management: Air. Quality Act 
(NEM:AQA), 39 of 2004. In the latter part of 2022, we 
voluntarily engaged with the National Environmental 
Consultative and Advisory Forum for air quality licences 
and compliance. The forum was established by the 
Minister of Department of Forestry, Fisheries and the 
Environment (DFFE). Sasol’s approach to air quality 
management was discussed with the forum as part of 
its consultative work and submissions were made for 
the forum’s consideration towards enabling sustained 
compliance and ambient air quality improvement 
aligned with the objectives of the NEM:AQA and the 
MES. During this reporting period, all of our operations 
also engaged with the office of the National Air Quality 
Office (NAQO) regarding the performance of our 
operations and disclosed information requested by the 
NAQO for purposes of improving ambient air quality. 
We have also co-operated with the hydrogen sulphide 
(H2S) task team that was established by the NAQO. 
We also engage in the Free State’s Climate Change 
Adaption Plan development process.

Our Future Sasol ambition is to “Grow shared value while accelerating our transition to net zero”. 
Appreciating the growing urgency to slow climate change, we have committed to reduce our 
dependence on coal as part of our decarbonisation journey. Synergistic to this ambition, we have 
identified initiatives to reduce our overall environmental footprint specifically with the objective to 
reduce our emissions and improve air quality.

PERFORMANCE

OUR AIR QUALITY LANDSCAPE

Our Southern African operations are dependent on 
coal and gas as primary feedstocks, with our Natref 
facility in Sasolburg reliant on crude oil. Outside Africa, 
our international operations depend on a diverse 
feedstock portfolio including coal, gas and crude-oil 
derived feedstock.

The emissions from our coal feedstock technologies 
in South Africa make up the greatest portion of our 

contribution to the relevant airsheds. Sasol has 
committed to reduce its dependence on coal, as part 
of our decarbonisation strategy. Over time, this strategy 
is expected to have a significant positive impact on our 
atmospheric footprint.

The contribution to emissions of our North American, 
Eurasian and Mozambique operations has been marginal 
compared to that of our South African operations.

Managing air quality in South Africa
In FY23, we continued our efforts to reduce our impact on air quality. These are focused on compliance 
with regulatory requirements to retain our licence to operate; innovative solutions; and constructive 
engagements with stakeholders including our fenceline communities and regulatory authorities.

RETAINING OUR LICENCE TO OPERATE
We continuously monitor emissions from our plants and the impact 
on ambient air quality in adherence to the conditions of our existing 
Atmospheric Emission Licences, as reported, amongst others, via our 
annual compliance reports submitted to the regulatory authorities.  
We have made significant progress towards compliance with the 
Minimum Emission Standards (MES). These are improvement 
standards prescribed for specific substances related to specific 
activities and 98% of our emissions sources are complying with the 
standards. We are advancing our commitments as outlined in our air 
quality compliance roadmaps and are in the last stretch of this journey 
to meet the same standards for newly designed plants by 1 April 2025. 
We disclose our compliance challenges and collaborate with the 
authorities in addressing these. Refer to the environmental compliance 
section on page 52 for details on our environmental compliance.

COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
We appreciate that our activities have an 
impact on the environment and on our 
fenceline communities. Our aim remains 
the creation and preservation 
of sustainable value informed by 
stakeholder engagements, responding 
to stakeholder expectations and being 
transparent regarding our commitments 
and performance. Accordingly, in 
December 2022, January and June 2023 
we engage transparently with our 
communities in Sasolburg and Secunda 
on our performance and ongoing air 
quality improvement efforts.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

43

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINTMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT // Air quality management CONTINUED

INTEGRATED ROADMAP OBJECTIVES AND TIMELINES

UPDATE ON OUR SO2 APPLICATION TO BE REGULATED VIA ALTERNATIVE LOAD-BASED EMISSION LIMITS 
UNDER CLAUSE 12A OF OUR MES

2019 baseline 
year 526 t/d SO2

4% SO2 load reduction to 503 t/d

30% SO2 load reduction to 365 t/d

2017

2019

2021

2025

2026

2030

2050

5% GHG reduction

30% GHG reduction

An alternate SO2 emission 
load-based limit for the 
period from 1 April 2025 up 
until 1 April 2030 has been 
applied for under Clause 12A 
of the MES

An alternate SO2 emission 
load-based limit from 
1 April 2030 indicating a 
30% SO2 reduction has 
been applied for under 
Clause 12A of the MES

Immediate SO2 reduction on 
a load basis experienced. In 
addition, a further reduction 
in NOx and PM emissions 
from the steam plants on 
load basis

2017 baseline 
year 63 MtCO2e

▪  Sasolburg: Steam 

station 1 and 2 
Particulate Matter (PMs), 
Nitorus Oxide (NOx), 
Sulphur dioxide (SO2) 
and thermal oxidisation 
compliance roadmap 
complete

▪  Secunda: Steam plant 

PMs and NOx, biosludge 
and HOW solution, 
crude tar tanks, SCC PMs 
and other compliance 
roadmap complete

Air quality 
compliance 
roadmap

GHG 

reduction 
roadmap 

Energy and 

process 
efficiency

600MW 
renewable 

energy¹

600MW(²⁾

renewable energy 

in a phased 
approach and 
energy efficiency

Decarbonising 
and creating 
new value pools

Turn down 
of 1 boiler

Additional boiler 
turndown and 

asset optimisation, 

additional gas³

PM

NOX

SOX

1  200MW is Sasol’s portion of the initial procured 600MW in partnership with Air Liquide.
2   Having sold part of the Air Separation Units (ASUs) to Air Liquide, 800MW represents Sasol’s consumption 

of the total 1 200MW target for Secunda.

3  An additional approximately 40 – 60 PJ/a gas if economically viable.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

44

Since 2015, we have implemented several projects at Secunda, Sasolburg and Natref, to progressively 
reduce emissions to comply with the MES. We have spent more than R7 billion over the last five years on 
emission reduction projects. As such, we have achieved MES compliance for 98% of our emission sources at 
these operations. The remaining sources (2%) are part of our ongoing journey to enable MES compliance by 
1 April 2025. The only remaining challenge relates to achieving the concentration-based limit for sulphur 
dioxide (SO2) emissions from the boilers at the SO steam plants. 
We do, however, have a solution to enable SO to effectively reduce its SO2 footprint from the boilers at its steam 
plant to optimally improve ambient air quality. This is through the implementation of an integrated air quality 
and GHG reduction roadmap, as represented on the diagram on the left, which includes an integrated design to 
enable the achievement of multiple environmental improvements and with SO2 reduction as a key focus. The 
integrated roadmap involves the turning down of boilers, reducing coal usage and ramping up our imports of 
renewable energy to 1 200MW by 2030, which is aligned to Sasol’s strategy. A reduction in emissions, through 
the implementation of energy efficiency projects can already be seen and we are progressing the deployment of 
more than half of the committed renewable energy target from 2025 onwards. 
To enable the implementation of our SO2 solution, we will need to be regulated via Clause 12A of the MES. 
Clause 12A of the MES provides for an existing plant, such as SO’s steam plant, to be regulated on an 
alternative emission load, as opposed to the current concentration-based limit (the mass of pollutant per 
cubic metre of air emitted) specified in the MES. We applied to the NAQO in June 2022 to be regulated on 
alternative load-based limits for the SO2 emissions generated from the boilers at SO’s steam plants from 
1 April 2025 onwards. 

On 11 July 2023, we were informed that the NAQO had refused the Clause 12A application of June 2022 
and on 31 July 2023, we submitted an appeal on the decision to the Minister of DFEE, as provided for in 
Section 43(1) of the National Environmental Management Act, 107 of 1998.

WWW  For more information relating to our SO2 journey refer to "Our SO2 compliance journey” www.sasol.com/air-quality/

Atmospheric emissions 
kilotons (kt)

2023 

2022 Reasons 

7,63

8,22

SO: 17% reduction (FY22 – FY23) as a result of the abatement installation 
of an additional three Electrostatic precipitators (ESP)s on the East plant. 
Sasolburg Ekandustria Operations (SEO): Reduction associated with the 
upgrade of ESPs as part of the abatement project for SEO.

122,04

118,70 SO: FY23: 3% increase (FY22 – FY23) due to higher steam production 

rates on average.

166,88

161,87

SO: Slight increase in SO2emissions for FY23 due to the higher steam 
production rates. The intensity however is comparable with the previous 
year considering the marginal changes in the sulphur content of the coal. 
SEO: Slight increase in sulphur emissions due to the higher sulphur 
content in the coal. 

Volatile organic 
compounds (VOC)

13,42

26,30 SO: 49% decrease in VOC emissions due the completion of the drains 

installation projects.

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINTMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT // Air quality management CONTINUED

AIR QUALITY OFFSETTING PROGRAMME

AIR QUALITY ABATEMENT ACHIEVEMENT: PROGRESS OVER THE LAST YEAR

We are committed to implementing the second 
phase of our offsetting implementation plan which 
is focused on the reduction of PM and SO2 pollution 
in the surrounding communities.

The plan includes a comprehensive education and 
awareness campaign, covering the public and 
schools. The school awareness campaign 
consisted of 26 primary schools within the 
communities of Govan Mbeki Local Municipality. 
The campaign created a positive impact as learners 
were introduced to in-depth concepts of air quality. 
Engagements sessions and door-to-door campaigns 
were conducted for 1 552 households for Embalenhle 
and 2 400 for Lebohang. The impact of the 
programme was bolstered by the publication of 
these relevant topics, in local newspapers, in three 
regional languages.

SEO's offset programme made good progress in 
2023. It included the construction of a 1.6km road 
in the Zamdela area, with an aim of reducing dust 
pollution (particulate matter) associated with 
vehicles travelling on the road. SEO and Natref cut 
about 4.4 million m2 of grass and removed some 
1 040 ton of biomass around the Sasolburg area. 
This resulted in avoiding approximately 6.6 tons 
of PM10, 5.2 tons of PM2.5 and 0.62 tons of SO2 
emissions. Similarly,around 3 080 tons of domestic 
waste was removed resulting in approximately 21.27 
tons of PM10, 22.5 tons of PM2.5 and 2.95 tons of 
SO2 emissions being avoided.

In FY23, we progressed with the implementation of our air quality compliance roadmap, with the 
following achievements:

PM EMISSION REDUCTION
Improvements for PM reduction within Secunda, Sasolburg and Natref Operations include:
•  At SO, we retrofitted 12 out of 17 ESPs and recorded an improvement of 17,6% from 2022; and
•  At SEO’s Steam Station plants, we upgraded seven of the 12 ESPs, with one boiler being retrofitted at 

our Steam Station 1 plant.
NOx EMISSION REDUCTION
•  Three additional low NOx retrofits at our boiler fleet were completed during the reporting year at SO, 

with the roll-out of the remainder of the fleet on track to be fully compliant with the MES limit.

•  At SO, low NOx burners were installed on six of the 12 operational boilers, with two low NOx burner 

installations currently in progress.

TOTAL VOLATILE ORGANIC COMPOUNDS (TVOC) REDUCTION
As part of Sasol’s overall VOC-reduction roadmap, we completed the SO TVOC drains project, 
commissioning and reaching beneficial operations was achieved in all four phases of the project.
SO2 EMISSION REDUCTION
Our boiler turndown plan will result in reducing our demand for boiler coal, thereby realising the potential 
to reduce our sulphur dioxide load release into the receiving environment.  WWW  For more information refer to 
NAQO's decision on our Clause 12A appeal together with our response www.sasol.com/node/6026.

INCINERATOR REDUCTION
We continue to review the sustainable alternative method to incineration for the handling of the 
Sasolburg waste streams.
For more information on our progress on air quality offset and abatement, refer to  WWW www.sasol.com/
air-quality/

AIR QUALITY ABATEMENT ACHIEVEMENT: 
TOWARDS 2025

PMs, NOx, SO2, VOCs
We are on track with our air quality compliance 
roadmaps to achieve compliance with the new 
plant standards in 2025: 
•  Installing low NOx burners on the remaining 

coal-fired boilers in SO and SEO aimed at 
reducing boiler NOx emissions;

•  Installing high-frequency controllers on the 

ESPs of the remaining boilers in Secunda and 
Sasolburg to reduce PM emissions;

•  Installing abatement equipment at the 

Synfuels catalytic cracker stack within SO;

•  Streamlining of SO blending facilities to meet 

the SO2 standard at SEO;

•  Installing VOC abatement equipment at the 

crude tar tanks within SO;

•  Reducing hydrocarbon releases from our 

phenosolvan and depitcher vents;

•  Abating hydrocarbon release to atmosphere 

via the coal tar filtration west stack at 
Secunda;

•  Finalising the routing of the biosludge from 

incineration to gasification;

•  Confirming the sustainable alternative 

method to incineration for the handling of the 
Sasolburg waste streams; and

•  Finalising solution for our HOW waste stream.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

45

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINTMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT // Water

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
Sasol is committed to responsible use of natural resources, 
preventing pollution and degradation by exercising our duty 
of care in respect of quality of air, water, land and biodiversity. 
We rely heavily on water for our processes and consider it a 
precious resource.

OUR GROUP APPROACH

FY23 OUTCOMES
SEO wins the Chemical and Allied Industries Association (CAIA) water award.

SO awarded the water use licence (WUL) for Groot Bossiespruit Wetland 
Reinstatement.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

46

Water management is important to Sasol, especially in our South African operations as it is located in 
a water stressed area. Our approach to water management includes continuous monitoring, measuring 
and reporting. 
We are a signatory to the UN Global Compact CEO Water Mandate and have adopted the Mandate’s 
Water Stewardship Framework in responding to water risks. 
Sasol is committed to improving our water use efficiency and pollution prevention initiatives whilst 
partnering with host governments and others to resolve water related challenges in the catchments 
within which we operate.

   Active monitoring of progress against short-term water targets.
   Achieved a B rating for our CDP Water disclosure score.

PERFORMANCE

OUR CDP WATER SCORE

Since 2010, Sasol has been voluntarily reporting to the CDP Water disclosure initiative. Over the years, our score has 
been better than the African region average. We are now scored in the Chemical sector. As our disclosure is for the 
previous financial year, it lags our annual reports by a year. In 2022, we regressed to a B score and it remains within the 
management band, which is higher than the Africa regional average of B- and the same as the Chemicals sector.  
We have identified the gaps to improve on this score and one of the biggest gaps, was the lack of a focused water 
policy, which has since then been finalised specifically for our Energy Business.

WWW  For more information on our CDP submission refer to www.sasol.com/index.php/investor-centre/sustainability-reporting

WATER TARGETS AND COMMITMENT FOR SASOL ENERGY

The Sasol Energy Business approved the methodology to develop short-term (Phase 1) and long-term (Phase 2) water 
targets. The Phase 1 targets for the three largest waters using operating model entities of Sasol Energy being, Secunda 
Operations (SO), Sasolburg Ekandustria Operations (SEO) and Mining are being implemented. The following table 
outlines the progress made against the short-term targets and commitments. 

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINTMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT // Water CONTINUED

SHORT-TERM WATER TARGETS AND COMMITMENTS

STATUS

COMMENTS

OME

SO

SEO

Maintain the condition based water intensity (receiving 
feedwater <300 uS/cm) at the FY16 baseline of 11,3 tons of 
water per ton of saleable product.

Develop a water loss reduction strategy to address 
unaccounted water losses by 2025.

To work towards achieving green drop certification status 
by 2025.

Support multi-stakeholder catchment assessments to 
identify opportunities to advance management of the 
Upper Vaal including Waterval catchment.

Commit to continue beyond fence-line involvement in 
communities to address water, sanitation and other priorities.

A 7,5% reduction in fresh-water usage for production on the 
Sasolburg sites by end of 2025 as measured against a FY21 
baseline. This physically equates to a reduction in water use of 
4ML/day or to operate within a maximum water consumption 
of 50ML/day as measured against a FY21 baseline.

To continue in pursuing the existing potable water target for 
the Sasolburg sites of an average monthly use of 150ML/month 
(approx. 5ML/day) over a financial year by end of 2025.

To continue to actively drive water loss reduction programs by 
addressing water leaks which are within operational control.

Maintaining SEO’s Green Drop Certification for the Sasolburg 
Bio-works. 

Providing support to multi-stakeholder catchment 
assessments to identify opportunities to advance management 
of the Upper Vaal. 

Continuing beyond fence-line involvement in communities 
where appropriate to address water, sanitation and other 
environmental priorities.

Unlikely to be achieved

In progress

Likely to be achieved

SO’s average water intensity for FY23 is 10.61 which is a 1.67 cubic meter per ton (m3/t) improvement against the average water intensity that 
was achieved in the corresponding time, last year. SO’s good (better than target) water intensity performance is predominately on account of 
lower-than-average water intake for the corresponding production numbers. An average water saving of 23ML/d were observed for FY23 when 
compared to FY22 average total abstraction. The first half of the year’s water abstraction were penalised by increased steam to oxygen ratios at 
gasification on account of poor coal quality resulting in higher demand for HP steam and low production numbers. The second half of the year’s 
water intensity were supported by improved production, low Rand Water intake and good raw water quality from Grootdraai Dam.

SO technical is busy with a potable water usage validation in an effort to identify potential unmetered losses. Data consolidation and analysis 
have been completed for all sites that are metered. Opportunities to reduce losses have been identified and attended to. Future opportunities 
being considered is to install smart meters to enable live monitoring, leak detection and high use analysis.

Findings and areas identified for improvement from the 2022 Department of Water and Sanitation (DWS) Greendrop audit report are being 
actioned to achieve SO Greendrop certification targeting the 2024 Green Drop audit planned by DWS.

Through a multi-stakeholder approach, a study to better understand the deterioration in feed water quality from Grootdraai Dam has been 
commissioned. This study is being implemented in collaboration with the DWS, Rand Water, Eskom and the Water Research Commission (WRC). 
SO has committed R1,5 million over a period of three years and WRC committed R500 000. Rhodes University has been appointed as the service 
provider to execute this study and have recently completed Phase 2 of this study by securing data agreements from stakeholders, developing a 
water quality model for the catchment and considering land use activities and climate change trends in scenario development. The next phase 
will involve capacity building to use the model and producing key action plans to improve water quality in the catchment.

In an effort to provide safe, clean and drinkable water that support better health, Social Investment had the following initiatives and 
programmes implemented:
•  Supplied 40 water tanks to rural schools in Mpumalanga and Mozambique;
•  Invested R25 million in the Leandra Sewer project;
•  Invested R52 million in the Charles Cilliers Water Supply pipeline;
•  Invested R58 million in the Greylinstad Waste Water Treatment Works (WWTW) and reticulation network; and
•  Invested R4,1 million in rural water provision.

The FY23 consumption was 52.2Ml/d which was above the 2025 target of 50Ml/d. The consumption was higher when compared to FY22 which 
was 50.4Ml/d. The reason for the higher usage was due to the final effluent recycle to fire water which was stopped in December 2022 due to 
equipment reliability issues. The focus areas to achieve the FY25 target are to maximise the dedicated domestic sewer re-use and use of final 
effluent to fire water. A project to reuse additional treated domestic and industrial wastewater as cooling water is also being scoped, which 
could be implemented to sustainably meet the 2025 target.

An average monthly use of 199ML was reported during FY23. This is above the 2025 target of 150ML per month. This is higher than the average 
monthly usage of 168ML during FY22. The increase was attributed to the Zuikerbosch partial line replacement project and flooding and 
maintenance of the Vaal Pump Station which necessitated supplementing raw water for production with potable water.

A portion of the Zuikerbosch raw water supply line was replaced. This reduced water losses substantially. A project was also launched to replace 
sections of the Midland firewater systems to reduce leaks.

A WWTW process audit, conducted by the Water Group and IX Engineers was completed. The report contains recommendations and findings 
which will be addressed. This supports the drive to maintain the Green Drop certification. Current systems are maintained.

SEO signed a Memorandum of Understanding with Rand Water to investigate the feasibility for an offtake of treated effluent from the Sedibeng 
works as an alternative source to river water. A revised price offer from Rand Water has made the business case favourable. SEO has agreed to 
providing Rand Water with a Letter of Intent to develop the project for bankability. 

SEO continued to support the Metsimaholo Local Municipality through the funding of a greater Sasolburg/Zamdela sanitation system review to 
determine opportunities to reduce loss of containment of raw sewage as well as reduce stormwater ingress which hydraulically overloads the 
SEO WWTW during high rainfall.

MINING

To ensure potable water use does not increase more than 15% 
against FY19 baseline of 1520ML by FY25.

Mining’s potable water use for FY23 was 1 616ML, thus meeting the target set. 

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

47

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINTMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT // Water CONTINUED

LICENCE APPLICATIONS

RIVER WATER AVAILABILITY

MAINTAINING COMPLIANCE WITH WATER USE AUTHORISATIONS:

ENABLING SUSTAINABLE SUPPLY OF WATER FROM THE INTEGRATED VAAL RIVER SYSTEM (IVRS):

•  SO continues to collaborate with the DWS in the process to renew and introduce amendments to its 

WUL. Engagements were previously initiated which allowed Sasol the opportunity to demonstrate the 
preparedness to work through the technical information with the DWS, thereby helping to facilitate 
the processing of the WUL application. Site visits and engagements were conducted during November 
and December 2021, 28 February 2022 and 14 October 2022. At the end of October 2022, the DWS 
provided an additional list of technical information. The additional information is quite extensive to 
collate and prepare, which led to the closure of the application. The DWS advised SO to initiate a new 
application, which will allow SO to collate and prepare the required information. The repair of process 
water dam 10A was completed. While filling the dam to full capacity, it was clear that some additional 
strengthening of the dam wall was needed to ensure the dam could be used at full capacity. The 
approved professional advised on the safe level at which the dam could be used while the additional 
engineering designs and measures can be concluded and implemented. The additional work is planned 
for the 2023 dry season. A process water treatment plant was successfully constructed to address a 
portion of surplus process water and is currently in the operational phase.

•  To meet the conditions of our WUL for SO at the end of 2020, we implemented additional lining 

measures for Nitro dams four and five. We are also working on a detailed engineering plan for the Groot 
Bossiespruit Wetland Reinstatement. This work is part of SO’s WUL Application, which was issued by 
the DWS on 2 May 2023, after it met all relevant requirements. We await the outcome of several licence 
amendment applications for our Mining Business. See the environmental compliance section for more 
details.

•  Excessive rainfall in November 2022 placed significant pressure on SO’s effluent storage balances 

requiring approval from authorities to allow for limited controlled releases to protect storage 
infrastructure.

Water use million metres cubed m³

River water use
Potable water use
Deslinated water
Other water use

Total water use

2023

87,8
11,3
3,6
11,4

114,1

2022

101,8
13,5
4,2
13,1

132,6

•  The storage levels in the IVRS have recovered well in the past two years thus reducing risks to supply in 
the short-term, however, medium to longer term risks still persists. Delays in the implementation of the 
Lesotho Highlands Water Project Phase 2, slow progress by municipalities in reducing water losses and 
limited progress in eradicating unlawful water use presents future risk of restrictions being placed on 
users of the IVRS. 

RIVER WATER QUALITY

ENABLING AN ADEQUATE QUALITY OF WATER SUPPLIED FROM THE IVRS:

•  In the past year, the quality of water supplied to SO improved due to good rainfalls in the catchment. 
The primary source of this water is Grootdraai Dam and its associated transfer system. However, we 
expect this to deteriorate in the dry season and have adopted a collaborative approach to resolving 
these challenges.

•  Sasol is supporting a partnership with the Water Research Commission and Rhodes University to 

address water quality challenges in the Grootdraai Dam Catchment supplying water to SO. The research 
is identifying and prioritising opportunities to improve water quality in the catchment.

CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) ON WASTEWATER DISCHARGES 

•  Aligned with information reported on the DWS Integrated Regulatory Information System (IRIS) we 

report on the SEO barrage effluent discharge and SO’s U53 discharge. 

•  Total COD discharged decreased in FY23 when compared to FY22.

2023

Compliance limit

COD tons/

year

COD (mg/L)

COD tons/
year

2022

COD tons/
year

2021

COD tons/
year

168
350

518

75
75

187
1065

1 252

156
*
442

598

74
365

439

Increase

Decrease

No change

The decrease in Total Water used for FY23 compared to FY22 is largely attributed to an improved river water 
quality following favorable rains resulting in less water use per volumes of steam generated at SO. For SO, 
the first half of the year’s water demand increased due to higher steam requirements on account of poor coal 
quality used at gasification. The second half of the year’s water demand decreased as a result of improved 
production and improved river water quality form Grootdraai Dam, further, SO experienced frequent potable 
water supply interruptions due to infrastructure maintenance resulting in reduced volumes of water supplied 
by Rand Water for process application. Other water use decreased due to less water use from Eurasian 
Operations.

SO
SEO

Total

*   SEO FY22 data has been restated due to system discrepancies

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

48

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINTMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT // Waste

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
Sasol is committed to improving our waste management by moving up the waste 
hierarchy by reducing, reusing and recycling the wastes we generate.

OUR GROUP 
APPROACH

FY23 OUTCOMES
Optimisation of operational cost of waste during plant shutdown resulted in cost avoidance 
of R25 million. 

PERFORMANCE AND INITIATIVES

SOUTH AFRICAN OPERATIONS

MINIMISE WASTE TO LANDFILL AND DRIVE WASTE BENEFICIATION OPPORTUNITIES.

SEO continued with its landfill avoidance 
drive, with 48% of its hazardous waste 
generated in 2023 (July 2022 – May 2023), 
compared to 29% in 2022. Two projects 
are underway at SEO to divert the high 
sulphur pitch waste stream from landfill. 
The one involves producing a product 
suitable as alternative fuel resource and 
the other incineration. 

SO continues to divert waste from landfill. 
To date a total of 40% of waste was 
diverted in FY23 which is in line with FY22 
performance (57% disposed; 3% avoided). 
In FY23, SO focused on the management 
of sludges by prioritising diversion from 
landfill with an additional benefit of cost 
avoidance. API sludge continues to be 
bioremediated. 

Waste kilotons (kt)

Hazardous waste generation
Non-hazardous waste generation
Total recycled waste

2023

277
207
139

2022

255
223
131

Increase

Decrease

No change

The increase in hazardous waste generated is largely attributed to the shutdown at SO. 
Non-hazardous waste decreased due to operational challenges at SO. The increase in 
recycled waste is largely due to SEO's implementation of the recycling Vinyl Chloride 
Monomer waste water that commenced in FY23 as opposed to being landfilled in the 
previous years.

During FY23, SO optimised the 
operational cost of waste 
generated during shutdown 
from two business units by 
managing the waste at its own 
authorised onsite waste facilities. 
This resulted in a sustainable 
cost avoidance of R25 million. 
SO continues to investigate 
opportunities to divert waste 
from landfill with three large 
volume waste streams targeted 
for FY24, with one stream 
requiring Department of Forestry, 
Fisheries and Environment 
(DFFE) approval through the 
exclusion process.

A potential cost saving project 
at SEO was completed where 
the brine sludge/filter cake from 
Chlorine plant was identified as 
suitable to be blended into the 
legacy ash sold. This will save not 
only on disposal costs, but also 
transport costs. A similar project 
with coal clinkers was also run. 

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

49

REDUCING THE OPERATIONAL COST OF WASTE STREAMS

ASH BENEFICIATION SUPPORTING

We continue to explore ways to improve on waste 
management practices, notably in implementing waste 
minimisation initiatives and alternative usage solutions.
Most waste disposal practices have been discontinued 
and the legacy sites closed. Rehabilitation of closed sites 
is either planned, underway or completed.

   48% of hazardous waste recycled at Sasolburg Ekandustria 
operations (SEO).
   Alternative methodologies to reduce and reuse waste at Secunda 
operations (SO) and SEO.
  SO continues to bioremediate API sludge. 

The projects will be implemented 
once the commercial aspects 
have been finalised. 

Operational costs at the SEO Wax 
catalyst manufacturing plant 
were reduced by changing service 
providers.

An application for the exclusion 
from the definition of waste for 
the riddlings from the Steam 
Stations has been submitted to 
the DFFE. If successful, one of 
SEO’s largest waste streams will 
be diverted from landfill. 

We continued to engage with 
third-party waste vendors to 
reduce the risks associated with 
our waste streams. 

Making ash available in line with 
government expectations to support an 
ash beneficiation sector. Sasol continued 
to sell ash into the market, the volume 
however reduced when compared to FY22 
due to the availability of legacy coarse ash. 
The coarse ash volumes available have 
largely been reduced. The fine ash sales 
however increased in FY23. Projects are 
ongoing to find ways to utilise the ash 
generated at SEO. 
CONSERVATION OF VALUABLE NATURAL 
RESOURCES
SEO continued bioremediating its 
biosludge in FY23. A total of 13,5kt was 
bioremediated by a third party.

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINTMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT // Land and biodiversity 

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
We have a commitment to responsible use, 
preventing pollution and exercising a duty of 
care in respect of managing land and 
biodiversity in the areas we operate, including 
our fenceline communities. 

OUR GROUP 
APPROACH

We address land risk and associated contamination liabilities by managing the Group top 
risk of major SHE incidents. Across all our operations and projects, we undertake continuous 
monitoring of the environment, including ecological, groundwater, soil, noise and air 
monitoring.
We recognise the interconnectedness of biodiversity loss and climate change and the urgent 
need to include biodiversity in our short- and long-term ambitions. To do so, we need to fully 
understand our biodiversity footprint.

   Biodiversity assessments undertaken at Secunda and Sasolburg facilities.
   Sasol ranked 7th out of 294 JSE listed companies and State-Owned Enterprises 
(SOEs) for biodiversity disclosure in the latest Biodiversity Disclosure Report 
released in June 2023.

We have undertaken a Biodiversity Footprint Assessment (BFA) at two of our largest operations in South Africa, namely Secunda Operations (SO) 
and Sasolburg Ekandustria Operations (SEO). The objective is to set biodiversity targets with the goal of maintaining and/or enhancing biodiversity. 

PERFORMANCE AND INITIATIVES

OUR BIODIVERSITY INITIATIVES

•  Over the years, SO has dedicated resources to research, monitor and manage its natural biodiversity assets in the semi-natural secondary area, 

which includes water and wetlands. Information is collated in a 'status of biodiversity' report which describes the trends of various indicators. 
In compiling the report, we focus on what are termed 'headline indicators for biodiversity' against a predetermined desired state or target.

•  SO has commenced with establishing the state of ecosystem health based on key indicator groups such as Odonata (dragonflies). Insects play 
a vital role in all terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems. Their role in supporting the diversity of the ecological processes on which life depends 
is significant. Odonata are less diverse than other insects, which makes them a good group to use as indicators for system health. 

•  SO has authorised a large wetland rehabilitation initiative that will also contribute to improving other wetland functions like water purification 

•  SO continues to contribute and support, through scientific assessments and reporting the terrestrial biodiversity monitoring at the Ramsar 

and biodiversity improvement.

wetland conservancy, Verloren Vallei.

•  To preserve biodiversity for future generations, we continue to manage two nature reserves near Sasolburg, hosting 14 species of game 

including gemsbok, eland, giraffe, springbok, impala and black wildebeest.

•  We are excited to announce the birth of four rhino calves on our Secunda site, after their mothers were saved from a severely poached area.
•  The British Broadcasting Corporation conducted filming a third serval documentary in Secunda. It is expected to be released in 2025.
•  Sasol Chemicals has issued a palm oil policy that is aimed at sustainable production and ensuring responsible sourcing of palm oil, palm kernel 
oil and derivatives. Palm oil production is associated with deforestation, biodiversity loss, soil erosion and water pollution, which contribute to 
climate change. Sasol supports and commits to the recent Principles & Criteria set by the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil, of which we are 
a member.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

50

FY23 OUTCOMES
Sasol Energy Business partnered with the Endangered 
Wildlife Trust (EWT) to advance biodiversity practices 
including undertaking a biodiversity footprint assessment for 
SO and SEO applying the Biological Diversity Protocol (BDP).

For the latest Biodiversity Disclosure Report released in 
June 2023, Sasol Limited ranked a credible 7th best out of 
294 JSE-listed companies and SOE in terms of biodiversity 
disclosure. While we see this as a commendable achievement, 
we recognise the score is still low at 11 out of a maximum of 32.

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINTMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT // Land and biodiversity CONTINUED 

MOZAMBIQUE 

FEATURE STORY

•  We made payment of bush clearing fees to the Government of Mozambique in compensation 

for the trees of economic value removed during projects.

•  We restrict activities (construction of flow lines, access roads and well pads) in sensitive areas 

such as wetlands, coastal dunes, areas with sensitive vegetation or animals.

•  Across Sasol's licence areas, we establish buffer zones within which specified activities are 

prohibited or restricted.

•  We monitor our sites in project areas to check for the presence of invasive species and 

distribute pamphlets in project areas.

•  The seismic lines created during our 2016 seismic survey have recovered fully, with 100% 

vegetation coverage. Since this has been approved by the authorities, no further ecological 
monitoring is required.

•  The seismic lines rehabilitated in 2020 on the PT5-C licence continue to demonstrate excellent 

recovery. Some of the lines are achieving 100% vegetation recovery. We continue to monitor 
the rehabilitation process.

THE NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY AND BUSINESS NETWORK (NBBN) 
AND THE ENDANGERED WILDLIFE TRUST (EWT) PARTNERSHIP

EWT partnered with Sasol Energy Operations and Technology to assist in the journey to 
mainstream biodiversity into our business. Every company has both negative and positive 
impacts on biodiversity and through this partnership, Sasol joins other large international 
companies in using the Biological Diversity Protocol (BDP) to present a baseline of our 
biodiversity. The BDP is a project of EWT's NBBN, a network which aims to facilitate a 
reduction in the impact of business on biodiversity in South Africa. The BDP is the first 
and only to date, standardised accounting framework based on double-entry bookkeeping 
and designed to help any organisation consolidate its impacts on biodiversity. Using this 
accounting framework, Sasol will be able to track any changes for each operation and 
ecosystem asset in a transparent and verifiable way. A pilot assessment, underatken as per 
BDP, is being finalised for the Sasol Energy operations in Secunda and Sasolburg. Once 
finalised the study will be used to inform our approach to advancing our biodiversity 
management practices including reporting and disclosure. 

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

51

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINTMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT // Environmental compliance

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
We are committed to adhering to applicable environmental regulatory 
requirements, consistent with our Code of Conduct and underpinned 
by various Sasol policies.

OUR GROUP 
APPROACH

We are cognisant of the diversity of our environmental compliance obligations across the numerous 
jurisdictions in which we operate. This is demonstrated by our adherence to applicable local and 
international laws, regulations and standards. We follow a robust process of reporting and mitigating 
environmental incidents, including any deviations from legal requirements. Our approach is based on 
an incident classification system which includes assessing incidents based on their potential to create 
significant degradation or pollution to the environment. 
We collaborate with the authorities on environmental inspections conducted at our facilities. 
Our responses to findings include key remedial interventions aimed at sustaining compliance.

PERFORMANCE

OUR OPERATIONS

F
E
R
T
A
N

I

I

G
N
N
M
L
O
S
A
S

 

Y
G
R
E
N
E
L
O
S
A
S

 

We consider all our operations in reporting, therefore the following environmental report is based on key compliance challenges, noting that not all of our operations experienced key environmental 
compliance challenges. The following are incidents which occurred at applicable regions and our response to them incorporating our approach: 

•  In January 2023, an incident occurred at Natref’s Durban Operations (NDO), Prospecton site. Crude oil seeped from a storage tank onto the floating roof of the tank. Several external odour complaints were received after the 
source was identified and amid the implementation of the mitigation actions. The tank was taken out of service for repair work. A compliance Notice in terms of Section 9(1) of The Schedule Activities Bylaw was issued by the 
eThekwini Municipality Health Department and a directive in terms of Section 30(6) National Environmental Management Act (NEMA) was issued to NDO by the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Economic Development, Tourism 
and Environmental Affairs (KZN-EDTEA). The incident was reported as a Section 30 incident and the necessary responses to the compliance notice and directive were submitted to the relevant authorities. In March 2023 a 
site inspection was conducted at NDO’s Prospecton site by KZN-EDTEA. No further administrative enforcement was undertaken.

•  NATREF experienced challenges with regard to the sampling and measurement of emissions at certain sample points stipulated in its Atmospheric Emission Licence (AEL). This caused inconsistent results and required 

further investigation. The matter was reported to the local licensing authority. Subsequent sampling activities, at these sampling points, showed that the emissions were within limits specified in the AEL.

•  An incident occurred at the Bosjesspruit Irenedale shaft in February 2023. A lightning strike knocked out power to the shaft. This resulted in the pumps at the water sump not operating. Heavy rainfall resulted in the shaft 
filling up with water and this spilled into the environment. Emergency protocols were initiated to manage the incident and rehabilitation specialists were appointed to assist with clean-up. The incident was reported to the 
Department of Water and Sanitation (DWS).

•  The Department of Mineral Resources and Energy (DMRE), Free State Region conducted an inspection at the Mooikraal mine in January 2023. The mine then received a Notice of intention to issue a Compliance Notice in 
terms of Section 31L of NEMA in February 2023. Sasol Mining submitted substantive representations to DMRE in response to the queries raised in the Notice and no further administrative enforcement was undertaken.

•  Sasol Mining is renewing its water use licenses (WUL) at its various mines. Certain challenges have been experienced with the WUL renewal process and in particular meeting some of the onerous requirements introduced by 
DWS. Subsequently, one of the four water use license renewal applications for Syferfontein mine was declined. Sasol Mining has submitted an appeal on the decision to the Water Tribunal on 22 July 2022, we await feedback.

•  As part of the contaminated land notification process that was done in terms of Part 8 of the NEMA: Waste Act, 59 of 2008, the Department of Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment (DFFE) conducted site visits at various 
Sasol retail service stations. The Sasol Swartgoud retail site subsequently received a remediation order to proceed with remediation activities as recommended in the specialist reports submitted to DFFE in accordance with 
Part 8 of the Waste Act. 

•  During December 2023, in Ormonde, there was a gas leak from the pipeline at a river crossing, We reported a section 30A incident to the Gauteng Department of Agriculture and Rural Development. A verbal directive was 

subsequently received allowing necessary repair work to be conducted on the line. 

activities. A section 30 incident was reported to DFFE. 

•  Illegal tapping from the Secunda Natref Integration pipeline resulted in the leakage of hydrocarbons into the environment in May 2023. Emergency protocols were initiated including necessary clean-up and remediation 

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

52

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINTMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT // Environmental compliance CONTINUED

A
D
N
U
C
E
S

S
N
O
I
T
A
R
E
P
O

O
E
S

A
N
H
C

I

 

H
T
R
O
N

A
C
I
R
E
M
A

•  On 27 July 2022, the National Prosecuting Authority served Sasol with a summons instituting criminal proceedings. The charges relate to historical aspects of environmental management at its Secunda 

Operations. The summons follows an investigation by the National Environmental Management Inspectorate, an agency of the DFFE, as reported on previously. Sasol had fully cooperated with the authorities 
in this investigation. The matter is presently before the courts and Sasol is adhering to the ongoing legal process. 

•  Incidents of an overflow of sewage from the petro ponds due to abnormally high domestic wastewater inflow from Metsimaholo Local Municipality (MLM) occur during significant rain events. This has been 
reported to DWS even though the root cause lies outside of SEO’s direct control. MLM infrastructure upgrades and repairs need to be made to the supporting MLM infrastructure. SEO is assisting with funds 
to support a study on behalf of the MLM to identify areas where stormwater ingress into the MLM owned reticulation infrastructure occurs.

•  Due to high rainfall, SEO experienced higher than expected water volumes within its water management system on site. This impacted maximum authorised discharge volumes that the SEO WUL allows for.  

SEO engaged DWS and a verbal directive was received in December 2022 which allowed SEO to temporarily release higher discharge volumes. 

•  Sasolburg Operation experienced challenges with hydrogen cyanide emissions resulting from its cyanide plant. Following investigations, we made upgrades to the plant. The remaining challenge is to ensure 

accurate emission sampling takes place and we continue to work on this. We have engaged the local licensing officer in this regard.

•  In March 2023, ammonia was released at the Bunsen Street site. Even though the duration was short, we reported this as a section 30 incident to the DFFE.

•  In the first quarter of FY23, we received a penalty for not recording gas test data, 20 000RMB/Q2.
•  For the second quarter we received a penalty for a missing record of the rainwater discharge on-line monitoring system's acceptance, 68 600RMB.

•  Based on the 08/01/2023 sampling, there was a reportable effluent violation of stormwater from Greens Bayou Plant in Texas. It was reported to the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. Outfall #002 
for the permitted parameter, Total Organic Carbon (TOC). The cause of this non-compliance is suspected to be related to a leaking pipe damaged by the freezing weather experienced at the Greens Bayou Plant 
from 22 to 25 December 2022. The leaking line was repaired, no further administrative enforcement was undertaken, the report was submitted in January 2023.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

53

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINTMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT //  

SHE and sustainable development (SHE&SD) 
data management and governance

OUR COMMITMENT  // 
We endeavour to meet the needs of our stakeholders by 
providing relevant and reliable data that is accurate and 
complete. It is important to ensure the highest quality of Safety, 
Health and Environment (SHE) and Sustainability Data (SD) 
assurance. A robust external assurance process provides 
enhanced confidence in the quality, reliability and accuracy of our 
SHE and SD. We are committed to transparency and providing 
appropriate assurance on disclosed data in line with our 
reporting criteria, as underpinned by our Group SHE Policy.

OUR GROUP 
APPROACH

The improvement of data quality and accuracy is a continuous effort. The timeous collection of 
complete and accurate SHE&SD data enables both internal and external reporting. The key to ensuring 
the completeness and accuracy of our SHE&SD is the Sasol Group Procedure for SHE&SD reporting.  
The procedure has undergone a thorough review over the last year and includes augmented 
requirements to ensure a rigorous governance process is followed. Further to this, an additional review 
has been undertaken to ensure our readiness to adopt and support new reporting requirements.  
By leveraging the SAP Sustainability Performance Management (SuPM) module, we are able to collect 
key non-financial SHE&SD from an Operating model entity (OME) level. The SAP SuPM system provides 
us with the capability to meet the data governance requirements set out in this Sasol Group Procedure 
and ensures data is reviewed and approved at appropriate levels within the business.

PERFORMANCE

Updating of our non-financial data Procedure
The rapid and continuous evolution of the sustainability reporting landscape requires perpetual enhancing of our 
non-financial data reporting process to ensure that we are always aligned to latest requirements. This process, which is 
paramount for compiling our annual suite of reports, is similarly informed by various ESG reporting frameworks as detailed 
on page 1. In addition, the non-financial data reporting process is supported by Sasol’s Procedure for the Measurement, 
Reporting and Verification (MRV) of GHGs, which has undergone rigorous review with the Businesses.

Updated ESG reporting frameworks and Sasol 2.0 makes it necessary to reconfigure our SAP SuPM system to reflect our 
new operating model. This also necessitated a review of the Group Non-financial Data Reporting Procedure as mentioned 
earlier. Key changes to the SAP SuPM systems and the Non-financial Data Reporting procedure included:

•  Procedure updates for improved data management processes;
•  Implementation of external audit process improvements identified in the current and previous year; and
•  A review of key performance indicators (KPI) selection methodologies to enhance the reporting process.

To continuously improve our non-financial data reporting, Sasol is investigating options for our existing reporting platform.  
The scope and system requirements are being informed by strategic working groups focused on New Reporting 
Requirements and is expected to be rolled-out within the next 12 to 24 months. This will allow the organisation to collect, 
analyse and present non-financial data, in line with industry best practice and to ensure adherence and readiness to 
support the new reporting requirements.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

54

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINTMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT // SHE and sustainable development (SHE&SD) data management and governance CONTINUED

REPORTING ASSURANCE

A combined assurance approach was followed for the 2023 non-financial data to enhance assurance coverage and effectiveness. Deloitte & 
Touche/Tholisiwe continued as our external assurance provider for 2023. ETA Operations and Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) controls were leveraged 
to augment the Deloitte and Touche/Tholisiwe external audit. SHE and non-SHE data for 2023 was assured by Deloitte and Touche/Tholisiwe, 
while the ETA operations audit focused on GHG emission data for calendar year 2022. The feedback from the external assurance process goes 
beyond the independent assurance report to the directors of Sasol Limited on page 63, in that the process enhances internal confidence in the 
integrity of information as presented in this report as well as lends credence to the underlying operational processes where the information is 
generated. The external assurance process enables improved quality of our decision-making process aligned with our Purpose to innovate for a 
better world. 

The businesses maintain external certification including the International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO) 9001, 14001 and 45001 and 
third-party Responsible Care® verification. SHE regulatory compliance audits are conducted within the businesses to assist in compliance 
management and assurance in addition to the Group compliance programme. Majority of our German operations are ECO Management and 
Audit Scheme (EMAS) validated. Our operations in North America are Responsible Care® (RCMS) or ISO 14001 (RC14001) certified. 

At Sasol, we conduct a robust internal and external assurance process to enhance quality, reliable and accurate sustainability data.

FY23 OUTCOMES
Under the mandate of the Group Executive Committee, 
a governance structure dedicated to the impact of the 
New Reporting Requirements (NRR) was established during 
FY23, to ensure fundamental alignment between Financial 
and non-financial data reporting teams.

A new dashboard and reporting platform has been 
introduced through the development of PowerBI 
dashboards for visualisation of non-financial data.

Improvement of non-financial data KPIs reported by 
the Businesses on an annual basis. The inclusion of more 
detailed data source information tables provides a holistic 
view of all data reported as part of our suite of KPIs.

Data 

reporting

Data 

collection

SuPM

Suite of 
Reports

Data 

assurance

Data 
analysis

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

55

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASINTRODUCTIONANNEXURESMANAGING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINTHuman Capital – Our people

2023

2022

2021

2020 LoA 2023 Footnote

Human Capital – Our people

2023

2022

2021

2020 LoA 2023 Footnote

PERFORMANCE DATA

Employee numbers (Group)
Permanent employees
Non-permanent employees
Employee turnover (Group)
Safety
Recordable Case Rate (RCR)

– Employee
– Service provider

ENERGY
Recordable Case Rate

– Employee
– Service provider

CHEMICALS
Recordable Case Rate

– Employee
– Service provider
CORPORATE CENTRE
Recordable Case Rate

– Employee
– Service provider

– Employee
– Service provider

Lost Workday Case Rate (LWDCR)

ENERGY
Lost Work Day Case Rate (LWDCR)

– Employee
– Service provider

CHEMICALS
Lost Work Day Case Rate (LWDCR)

– Employee
– Service provider
CORPORATE CENTRE
Lost Work Day Case Rate (LWDCR)

Employee and service provider fatalities

– Employee
– Service provider

– Employee
– Service provider

ENERGY

– Employee
– Service provider

Employee and service provider fatalities

CHEMICALS
Employee and service provider fatalities

– Employee
– Service provider
CORPORATE CENTRE
Employee and service provider fatalities

– Employee
– Service provider

29 073
28 657
416
1 725

28 630
28 279
351
2 867

28 949
28 725
224
3 869

 31 001,00 

 1 936,00 

 0,26 
 0,29 
 0,22 

 0,27 
 0,31 
 0,23 

Limited

1

2

 0,14 
 0,16 
 0,11 

 0,11 
 0,14 
 0,08 

Limited

 2
 1 
 1 

Limited

 6
 3
 3 

 0,27 
 0,35 
 0,22 

 0,28 
 0,38 
 0,22 

 0,19 
 0,15 
 0,27 

 0,13 
 0,18 
 0,10 

 0,13 
 0,19 
 0,09 

 0,13 
 0,10 
 0,18 

 2
 1 
 1

 2
 1 
 1 

 – 
 – 
 – 

 – 
 – 
 – 

 15 
 1 
 14

 12
 – 
 12 

 3
 1 
 2 

 0,27 
 0,34 
 0,20 

 0,27 
 0,35 
 0,20 

 0,26 
 0,31 
 0,17 

 – 
 – 
 – 
 0,10 
 0,12 
 0,08 

 0,10 
 0,12 
 0,08 

 0,15 
 0,19 
 0,08 

 – 
 – 
 – 
 5
 4 
 1 

 4
 4 
 – 

 1 
 – 
 1 

 – 
 – 
 – 

 13
 1 
 12 

 7 
 1 
 6 

 6 
 – 
 6 

Total number of first aid cases

 303 

 530 

 1 

 3 

Limited

 130,94 
 70,57 
 60,37 

 162,60 
 76,20 
 86,40 

 – 
 – 
 – 
 1
 – 
 1
 – 
 453
 325 
 128 
 – 
 146,70 
 69,29 
 77,41 

 132,52 
 59,86 
 72,66 

 13,23 
 8,48 
 4,75 

 0,95 
 0,95 
 – 

 38 
–
–
2
2
5
22
2
3

67
0
21
0
0
0
0
10
17

CORPORATE CENTRE
Total major and significant fires, explosions and releases

– Major fires, explosions and releases
– Significant fires, explosions and releases

Major and significant road product transport incidents

ENERGY
CHEMICALS
CORPORATE CENTRE

ENERGY
CHEMICALS
CORPORATE CENTRE

– Employee
– Service provider

– Employee
– Service provider

Total number of person hours worked (million)

ENERGY
Total number of person hours worked (million)

CHEMICALS
Total number of person hours worked (million)

– Employee
– Service provider
CORPORATE CENTRE
Total number of person hours worked (million)

– Employee
– Service provider
Occupational illness 
Irreversible occupational diseases (IROD) have  
permanent health effects

Asbestosis
Mesothelioma
Chronic obstructive airway disease (COAD)
Occupational asthma (including allergic sensitisation)
Pneumoconiosis
Noise-induced hearing loss
Chronic work-related upper limb disorder (WRULD)
Other

Reversible occupational diseases (ROD) have temporary 
health effects

Reactive airway dysfunction syndrome (RADS)
Tuberculosis
Allergic reactions other than RADS
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
Heat-related disease
Shift worker’s sleep disorder
Work-related upper limb disorder (WRULD)
Other

Skills development (Southern Africa)
Total skills development expenditure (R million)
Investment in employee learning (R million)
Investment in learning as a % of payroll
Investment in black employees (R million) 

Development interventions (number of individual 
interventions)
Investment in bursary scheme (R million)
Undergraduate and postgraduate bursars
Number of employees receiving leadership training
Number of employees in Sasol’s maintenance artisan 
learner pools

*  This includes bursaries awarded in Mozambique

–
–
–
 1 
 – 
 1 
 – 
 379 
 255 
 122 
 2 
 162,52 
 71,38 
 91,14 

 148,69 
 62,08 
 86,61 

 12,79 
 8,26 
 4,53 

 1,04 
 1,04 
 – 

 51 
 –
 –
10
1
4
17
12
7

41
–
13
–
3
–
–
8
17

1 431
1 092
6,1
724,64

256 013
73,81
544
8 815

Limited

 32
–
–
6
1
3
22
0
2

34

9
1
–
–
–
3
21

 77
 – 
 – 
 16 
 3 
 7 
 35 
 16 
 1 

 62
 6
 33 
 9
 – 
 2 
 – 
 3
 9 

4

5

6

1 216
957
5,8
698

1 182
983
8,0
884

 1 170,00 
 967,00 
 5,90 
 748,00 

Limited

264 335
75,6
602
5 125

171 258  173 514,00 
 59,60 
 918,00 
 7 097,00 

46,7
729
6 162

599

853

762

 798,00 

Employee and service provider fatal injury frequency rate
Total major and significant fires, explosions and releases

– Major fires, explosions and releases
– Significant fires, explosions and releases

ENERGY
Total major and significant fires, explosions and releases

– Major fires, explosions and releases
– Significant fires, explosions and releases

CHEMICALS
Total major and significant fires, explosions and releases

– Major fires, explosions and releases
– Significant fires, explosions and releases

 0,001 
 20 
 1
 19 

 0,007 
 23
 2
 21

Limited

3

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

56

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASANNEXURESINTRODUCTIONNatural Capital – Our environment

2023

2022

2021

2020

LoA 2023

Footnote

PERFORMANCE DATA CONTINUED

Sasol in Society – Spend

Skills development spend
Social investment (SI) spend
SI spend by Region:

South Africa
Mozambique
North America
Qatar

SI spend by focus area:

Quality Education
Bridge to work: Skills development
Enterprise and supplier development
Community health and infrastructure 
Environment and biodiversity
Sasol for Good
Development sponsorships

B-BBEE (RSA only)
Black-owned spend
Black-owned women spend
B-BBEE status

Production performance
Product meant for external sale (kilotons) 

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Greenhouse gases (GHG) (kilotons)
Direct methane (CH4)

ENERGY
Secunda

Sasolburg

Mining

ENERGY
Secunda

Sasolburg

Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Nitrous Oxide (N2O) (kilotons)

Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

2023
Rm

857,3

682,5
150,4
24
0,4

233,1
230,0
142,2
177,0
13,4
13,1
48,5

2022
Rm

743,3

526
201,9
15,2
0,2

186,4
242,8
65,7
184,2
38,6

25,6

2021
Rm

526,2

440,1
75,9
9,7
0,5

156,7
175,7
18,1
144
13,2

18,5

41 700
28 500
Level 3

33 600
21 600
Level 3

23 800
15 800
Level 4

2020
Rm

LoA 2023

Footnote

Natural Capital – Our environment

Direct carbon dioxide (CO2) Scope 1 (kilotons)

2021

2020

LoA 2023

Footnote

ENERGY
Secunda

Sasolburg

Mining
Natref
Mozambique

North America

Africa

Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia

Direct carbon dioxide (CO2) Scope 1 (CO2) 
equivalent) (kilotons)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Indirect carbon dioxide (CO2) Scope 2 (kilotons)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Indirect carbon dioxide (CO2) Scope 3 (kilotons)
Total greenhouse gas (CO2 equivalent) (kilotons)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

GHG intensity (CO2 equivalent/ton product meant 
for external sale)
GHG Intensity per facility (Using total Production)

2023

 54 999 
 53 438 
 47 619

 4 343

 19
 953
 455

 49
 1 561 
 543

 1 018

 – 
 58 644 

 57 079
50 319
 4 819 
 92
 954
 842
 53 
 1 565 
 543 
 1 022
 – 
5 748
 5 104 
3 552
 582
 687 
 261
 – 
 23 
 643 
 173
 470
 – 

64 392
62 184
53 871
 5 401 
 779
 1 215
 842
 76
2 208
 716 
 1 492
 – 
 4,12

7,77
 2.30 
 0.01 
 0.36 
 0.24 

2022

 54 076 
 52 383 
 46 752

 4 153

 18
 961
 458

 41
 1 693 
 633

 1 060

 – 
 57 284

 55 587
 49 283 
 4 380
 101 
 962 
 820 
 41 
 1 697 
 633
 1 064
 – 
 6 607
 5 972, 
 4 084 
 784 
 798 
 281
 – 
 25
 635
 151
 484
 – 

 63 891
 61 559
 53 367
 5 164
 899 
 1 243
 820 
 66
 2 332
 784
 1 548
 – 
 3,86 

 7,79 
 2,18 
 0,01 
 0,33
 0,24 

 57 247 
 55 205
 49 469

 4 238 

 17 
 1 023 
 416 

 42 
 2 042 
 681 

 1 361 

 0,12 
 60 778 

 58 731 
 52 310
 4 401
 168 
 1 024 
 786
 42 
 2 046
 681 
 1 365 
 – 
 5 495
 5 124
 3 573
 536
 721
 269
 – 
 25
 371
 107
 264
 – 

 66 273
 63 855 
 55 883 
 4 937 
 889 
 1 293
 786
 67
 2 417 
 788
 1 629 
 – 
3,65

 7,33 
 1,83 
 0,01 
 0,37 
 0,23 

Reasonable

Restated
2020 – 2022
Restated
2021 – 2022

Restated
2020-2021

Restated
2020 – 2022
Restated
2021 – 2022

 56 240 
 54 074 
 48 544

 4 324

 17
 853 
 296 

 40 
 2 166 
 638 

 1 523 

 5 
 59 411

 57 461
 51 085 
 4 686 
 135 
 856
 658 
 40 
 2 171
 638 
 1 528 
 5 
 5 197 
 4 780 
 3 310 
 502 
 706  Restated 2022
 235 
 – 
 27 
 417
 104  Restated 2022
 313 Restated 2022

Reasonable

Limited
Reasonable

 – 

 64 829
 62 241
 54 395
 5 189
 841 
 1 092 
 658 
 67
 2 588
 742 
 1 841 
 5
3,84

 7,38 
 1,96 
 0,01 
 0,33 
 0,19 

Reasonable

Refer to page 63 of the  CCR

 

13

13

14

26

15

16

12

13, 9

13, 9
10
11
14
26

15
16

17

18
19

13, 9
13, 9
10, 17
11
14
26

15
16

20

21

Reasonable

7

 15 647
 13 903
 6 388
 1 360
 1 967
 3 397
 38 
 754 
 1 744
 837
 907
 – 

 134,46 
 134,42 
 106,32 

 7,83 

 3,19

 0,06 
 16,83 
 0,19 
 0,04 
 – 
 0,04 
 – 
 1,87 
 1,86 
 0,86

 1,00 

 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 0,01 
 – 
 0,01 

 16 550 
 14 399 
 6 326
 1 366 
 2 176
 3 712 
 39
 781
 2 151
 1 261
 890
 – 

 130,11 
 130,07 
 102,99 

 7,66 

 3,62 

 0,06 
 15,75 
 0,00 
 0,03 
 0,00 
 0,03 
 0,00 
 0,73 
 0,72 
 0,55 

 0,17 

 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 0,01 
 – 
 0,01 
 – 

 18 166
 15 571 
 6 923
 1 586 
 2 724 
 3 514
 42
 782
 2 595 
 1 370 
 1 225 
 – 

 132,53 
 132,48 
 104,75 

 5,02 

 6,57 

 0,06 
 16,08 
 – 
 0,04 
 – 
 0,04 
 – 
 1,63 
 1,62 
 1,46 

 0,16 

 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 0,01 
 – 
 0,01 
 – 

 16 879
 13 909 
 6 505
 1 440
 1 945
 3 294 
 46 
 679 
 2 970 
 1 275
 1 695
 – 

 123,52
 123,45
 95,40 

Reasonable

 5,13

 7,03 

Restated
2020 – 2022
Restated
2020- 2022
Restated
2020 – 2022
 0,15  Restated 2020
 15,73 
 0,01 
 0,07 
 – 
 0,07 
 – 
 1,86 
 1,85 
 1,17 

Reasonable

Restated 
2020 – 2022
Restated 
2021 – 2022

 0,68 

 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 0,01 
 – 
 0,01 
 – 

8

9

10

11

13, 9

9

9

Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

57

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASANNEXURESINTRODUCTIONNatural Capital – Our environment

2023

2022

2021

2020

LoA 2023

Footnote

Natural Capital – Our environment

2023

2022

2021

LoA 2023

Footnote

PERFORMANCE DATA CONTINUED

Other strategic business units and Functions
Eurasia
North America
Chemicals Africa

Atmospheric emissions (kilotons)
Nitrogen oxides (NOx) (kilotons)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Sulphur oxides (SOx) (kilotons)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) Indicator of 
Performance (kilotons)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Particulates (fly ash) (kilotons)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Waste (kilotons)
Hazardous waste (kilotons)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions

Reasonable

Reasonable

Reasonable

 0.03 
 0.52 
 0.82 
 – 

 0,02 
 0,39
 0,83
 – 

 0,02 
 0,36 
 0,74 
 – 

 0,02 
 0,36 
 0,59 
 – 

 122,04 
 120,52 
 105,26 
 14,28 
 – 
 0,98 
 – 
 – 
 1,51 
 0,32 
 1,19 
 – 
 166,88 
 166,84 
 143,64 
19,95 
 – 
 3,25 
 – 
 – 
 0,04 
 0,01 
 0,03 
 – 
 13,42 

 13,42 
 13,42 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 –
 –
 –
 – 
 7,63 
 7,63 
 6,91 
 0,72 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 

 277 
 261
 184
 50
 6
 19 
 – 
 2

 118,70 
 117,20 
 102,20 
 14,10 
 – 
 0,90 
 – 
 – 
 1,60 
 0,40 
 1,20 
 – 
 161,87 
 161,81 
 137,27 
 17,41 
 – 
 7,14 
 – 
 – 
 0,05 
 0,02 
 0,03 
 – 
 26,30 

 26,30 
 26,30 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 8,22 
 8,22 
 7,40 
 0,81 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 

 255
 238
 144
 46
 25
 18
 – 
 5

 124,00 
 122,30 
 107,90 
 13,60 
 – 
 0,80 
 – 
 – 
 1,70 
 0,50 
 1,20 
 – 
 181,10 
 181,10 
 156,10 
 17,80 
 – 
 7,20 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 27,80 

 27,80 
 27,80 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 8,20 
 8,10 
 7,30 
 0,80 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 0,10 
 0,10 
 – 

 320
 303
 242
 42
 7
 11
 – 
 1

 143,60 
 141,50 
 126,90 
 13,40 
 – 
 1,20 
 – 
 – 
 2,10 
 0,50 
 1,60 
 – 
 186,50 
 186,50 
 162,20 
 17,20 
 – 
 7,10 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 38,30 

 38,30 
 38,30 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 10,30 
 10,20 
 9,30 
 0,90 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 0,10 
 0,10 
 – 

 333
 315
 262
 33
 5
 14
 – 
 1

CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Non-hazardous waste (kilotons)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Total waste (kilotons)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Recycled waste (kilotons)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

22

Energy use (thousand gigajoules)
Electricity (purchased) – Non-renewable sources

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Electricity (purchased) – Renewable sources 
(thousand gigajoules)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions

 20 069
 17 671
 12,292
 2 016 
 2 379
 903

 81.00 
 2 398,00 
 428,00 
 1 970,00 
–
 342

Limited

23

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

58

Limited

Limited

Limited

2020

 18 
 17
 1
 – 
 196
 172
 107
 55
 5
 1
 – 
 4
 24 
 13
 11
 – 
 528
 486 
 368 
 88
 11
 15
 – 
 4
 42,00 
 30,00 
 12,00 
 – 
 82
 60
 30 
 19 
 6 
 4 
 – 
 1
 22 
 22 
 – 
 – 

 799
 – 
 95 
 3 569

 2 905
1

 17
 16
 1
 – 
 181
 157
 85
 58
 3
 1
 – 
 10
 24
 14
 10
 – 
 499
 460
 327
 99
 10
 12
 – 
 12 
 39
 29
10 
 – 
 124
 108
 62,
 27 
 6
 4,
 – 
 9
 16
 16 
 – 
 – 

 26 044
 23 252
 17 881
 1 855
 2 497
 930
 – 
 89 
 2 792
 679 
 2 113 
 – 
38

 16
 15 
 1
 – 
 207 
 184
 98
 58
 4
 1
 – 
 23
 23 
 12
 11
 – 
 484 
 445 
 282
 108
 10
 20
 – 
 24
 39
 27
 12 
 – 
 139
 122 
 55
 37 
 4 
 5 
  –
 21
 16 
 16
–
 – 

 18
 17
 1
 – 
 223
 198 
 112
 58
 3
 1
 – 
 24
 25
 14
 10
 – 
 478
 435 
 255
 104
 28
 19
 – 
 29
 42 
 31
 11 
 – 
 131
 113
 47
 27
 7
 5
 – 
 27
 18 
 18,
 – 
 – 

 22 100
 19 909
 13 614
 2 612
 2 661 
 938 
 – 
 84
 2 191
 304,
 1 887
 – 
 362

 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 

 24 604 
 21 035
 16 040
 1 703
 2 398 Restated 2022

 663 Restated 2022

17

18

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASANNEXURESINTRODUCTIONNatural Capital – Our environment

2020

LoA 2023

Footnote

Natural Capital – Our environment

2020

LoA 2023

Footnote

2021

38
38

Restated 2022

PERFORMANCE DATA CONTINUED

CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Steam (purchased) – Non-renewable sources 
(thousand gigajoules)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Steam (purchased) – Renewable sources 
(thousand gigajoules)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Feedstock to electricity (self-generated) 
(thousand gigajoules)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Feedstock to steam (thousand gigajoules)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Mobile fuel use (thousand gigajoules)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions

2023

342
342

4 859

 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
4 859
1 312
3 547
 –
229

229
229

 35 196 

 32 367
 14 766
 16 660 
 –   
 –   
 851
 91 
 2 829
 –   
 2 829 
 –   
 248 342 
247 408 
 224 674 
 22 674 
 –   
 –   
 –   
 60 
 934
 934 
 –   
 –   
551,00
517,00
161,00
 – 
256,00
16,00
23,00
61,00

2022

362
 362
 – 
 – 
 4 390

 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 4 390
 1 193
 3 197
 – 
 221

 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 221 
 221
 – 
 – 
 30 200 

 26 078
 10 231
 14 936
 – 
 – 
 832
 79
 4 122 
 4 122
 – 
 – 
 246 023
 244 685 
 222 980 
 21 706 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 1 337
 1 337
 – 
 – 
 558,00 
 531,00 
 170,00 
 – 
 249,00 
 14,00 
 18,00 
 80,00 

 40 387

 39 472

 37 893 
 18 865
 18 126
 – 
 – 
 825
 77
 2 494 
 2 494 
 – 
 – 
 247 350 
 245 880 
 225 563 
 20 317 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 1 470
 1 470
 – 
 – 
 534,00 
 444,00 
 136,00 
 – 
 226,00 
 17,00 
 9,00 
 56,00 

 37 376
 18 536
 17 892
 – 
 – 
 868
 80
 2 096
 2 096 
 – 
 – 
 251 027 
 249 639 
 230 216 
 19 423
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 1 388 
 1 388
 – 
 – 
 618,00 
 486,00 
 161,00 
 – 
 234,00 
 27,00 
 12,00 
 52,00 

Restated
2020 – 2022

27

18

24

29

24

25

26

CHEMICALS
Eurasia

North America
Africa

Stationary fuel use (thousand gigajoules)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Fuel gas (thousand gigajoules)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Other energy use (thousand gigajoules)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Total energy use (thousand gigajoules)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia

North America
Africa

Material use (kiloton)
Coal (dry ash-free basis)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions

2022

 27,00 
4,00

 21,00 
 2,00 
 66,70 
 2,50 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 2,50 
 64,20 
 0,30 
 63,80 
 0,10 
 66 057
 34 457
 14 278
 5 819
 – 
 6 981 
 6 650
 729
 31 600
 8 682
 22 918
 – 
 10 481,00 
 9 001,00 
 8 651,00 
 350,00 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 1 480
 1 400
 80 
 – 
 380 475
 334 664 
 269 924
 45 423 
 2 910
 7 933
 7 500
 974 
 45 811 
 17 626

2021

 90,00 
5,00 

 83,00 
 2,00 
 4,50 
 2,60 
 0,40 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 2,20 
 1,90 
 0,20 
 1,70 
 – 
 78 954 
 34 106 
 15 367 
 5 713
 – 
 6 736 
 5 564 
 726 
 44 848 
 10 069,00 
 34 779,00 
 – 
 14 476 
 10 781 
 10 258
 523 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 3 695
 3 157 
 538
 – 
 407 744 
 352 356 
 288 070 
 46 533 
 2 726 
 7 683
 6 397
 947
 55 388 
 17 874

 132,00 
 5,00

 60,00 
 67,00 
 3,20 
 1,80 
 0,30 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 1,50 
 1,40 
 0,10 
 1,30 
 – 
 82 354 
 32 820 
 16 418 
 5 710 
 – 
 6 756 
 3 199 
 737 
 49 534 
 9 445
 40 089 
 – 
 13 084 
 9 386
 8 572 
 732 
 – 
 82 
 – 
 – 
 3 698 
 3 171 
 527
 – 
 411 157
 350 738
 289 945 
 45 460
 2 632
 7 664
 4 077 
 960
 60 419 
 16 769 

2023

34,00
5,00

27,00
2,00
124,70
9,90

9,90
114,80
0,40
114,00
0,40
 65 072 
 35 587
 15 323
 5 747
 –   
 7 297 
 6 383
 837
 29 485 
 5 793
 23 692 
 –   
 9 883,00 
 8 082,00 
 7 839,00 
 243,00 

 1 801 
 1 747
 54
 –   
 384 669 
 341 643
 275 055 
 47 340
 2 635
 8 216 
 7 257
 1 140
 43 026
 13 619 

 15 614,00 
 15 614,00 
 15 614,00 

 29 404 
 3 

 28 183
 2 

 37 512 
 2

 15 547,00 
 15 547,00 
 15 547,00 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 

 17 298,00 
 17 298,00 
 17 298,00 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 

 68 

 16 942,00 
 16 942,00 
 16 942,00 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 

Reasonable

Restated
2020-2021
 43 582  Restated 2022

28

29

17

28

18

29

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

59

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASANNEXURESINTRODUCTIONPERFORMANCE DATA CONTINUED

Natural Capital – Our environment

2023

2022

2021

2020

LoA 2023

Footnote

Natural Capital – Our environment

2023

2022

2021

2020

LoA 2023

Footnote

CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Crude oil processed (kilotons)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Crude oil processed (mm bbl)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Nitrogen from air (kilotons)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS

Eurasia
North America

Africa

Oxygen from air (kilotons)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia

North America
Africa

Natural gas (kilotons)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions

 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 4 085,00 
 4 085,00 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 4 085,00 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 30,16 
 30,16 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 30,16 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 547,00 
 547,00 
 – 
 547,00 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 

 – 
 – 

 – 
904,80 
 738,10 
 – 
 738,10 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
166,60 
 164,00 

 2,50 
 – 
 2 945,70 
 1 790,50 
 1 118,40 
 671,90 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 0,20 

 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 3 886,00 
 3 886,00 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 3 886,00 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 28,70 
 28,70 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 28,70 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 544,60 
 544,60 
 – 
 544,60 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 

 – 
 11 778,09 
 11 631,00 
 10 843,00 
 788,00 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
147,09 
 144,79 

 2,30 
 – 
 3 221,00 
 1 879,70 
 1 150,50 
 729,00 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 0,10 

 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 3 665,00 
 3 665,00 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 3 665,00 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 27,10 
 27,10 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 27,10 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 542,80 
 542,80 
 – 
 542,80 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 

 – 
 12 318,43 
 12 192,40 
 11 379,00 
 813,40 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
126,03 
120,13 

 5,90 
 – 
 2 118,70 
 1 852,40 
 1 119,50 
 732,80 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 0,10 

 3 767,32 
 3 767,32 

 3 767,32 

 27,80 
 27,80 

 27,80 

 537,00 
 537,00 

 537,00 

880,60
771,60

771,60

109,00
108,60

 2 927,70 
 1 859,10 
 1 158,60 
 700,50 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 

 – 
 – 

 – 
 – 

Restated
 2020 – 2022

Restated
2021 – 2022

Restated
2020 – 2022

CHEMICALS
Eurasia

North America
Africa

Natural gas (bscf)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Other (e.g. chemicals, feedstock)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia

North America
Africa

Total material use (kilotons)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia

North America

Africa

Water (thousand cubic meters)
River water (thousand cubic meters)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Desalinated water (thousand cubic meters)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions

 1 068,60 
 310,20 

 1 155,20 
 414,80 

 758,40 
 – 
 141,4 
 89,8 
 55,9 
 33,8 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 51,6 
 15,0 
 36,6 
 – 
 2 937,00 
 781,00 
 780,00 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 1,00 
 2 156,00 
 1 320,00 

 740,30 
 – 
 142,24 
 86,46 
 54,00 
 32,44 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 55,78 
 20,03 
 35,75 
 – 
 3 745,00 
 812,00 
 811,00 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 1,00 
 2 933,00 
 2 041,00

 1 341,30 
 304,20 

 1 037,10 
 – 
 141,38 
 90,76 
 55,55 
 35,20 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 50,62 
 0,55 
 50,08 

 2 661,00 
 919,00 
 918,00 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 1,00 
 1 742,00 
 970,00 

 836,00 
 – 
26 662,57
 23 330,02 
 17 552,60 
 2 009,10 
 –   
 3 767,32 
 –   
 1,00 
 3 333,60 
 1 738,80 

 892,00 
 – 
 27 774,00 
 23 519,60 
 17 476,40 
 1 957,00 
 – 
 4 085,00 
 – 
 1,20 
 4 254,80 
 2 619,90 

 772,00 
 – 
 39 388,00 
 36 158,00 
 30 209,50 
 2 061,60 
 – 
 3 886,00 
 – 
 1,10 
 3 230,39 
 1 418,99 

 266,30 
 264,20 

 2,10 
 – 
 90,00 
 89,40 
 54,00 
 35,40 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 0,60 
 0,50 
 0,10 

 4 998,00 
 1 018,00 
 1 014,00 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 4,00 
 3 980,00 
 966,00 

 3 013,00 
 1,00 
 40 584,93 
 36 212,60 
 30 454,50 
 2 089,00 
 – 
 3 665,00 
 – 
 4,10 
 4 372,33 
 1 350,33 

 1 594,40 

 1 634,80 

 1 811,40 

 3 021,00 

 –   

 – 

 – 

 1,00 

 87 803 
 87 803
 66 240
 20 306
 –   
  1 257
 –   
 –   
 –   
 –   
 –   
 –   
 3 551 
 645
 –   
 –   
 –   
 645 
 –   
 –   

 101 804 
 101 804 
 79 751
 19 962
 – 
 2 091 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 4 232
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 

 108 559 
 105 195
 82 427
 20 834
 – 
 1 934
 – 
 – 
 3 364
 1
 3 363 
 – 
 2 241 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 

 115 492 
 104 679
 82 007
 20 744
 – 
 1 928
 – 
 – 
 10 813 
 0,50 
 10 812 
 – 
 762 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 

Restated
 2020 – 2022

30

Restated
 2020 – 2022

30

Reasonable

Restated
 2020 – 2022
Restated
 2021 – 2022

30

30

30

31

32

33

32

30

39

30

30

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

60

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASANNEXURESINTRODUCTIONNatural Capital – Our environment

2020

LoA 2023

Footnote

Natural Capital – Our environment

 762 
 762 Restated 2022

33

CHEMICALS

Eurasia
North America
Africa

PERFORMANCE DATA CONTINUED

CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Potable water (thousand cubic meters)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America

Africa

Other water (e.g. borehole water)  
(thousand cubic meters)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Total water use (thousand cubic meters)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Liquid effluent (thousand cubic meters)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Water recycled (thousand cubic meters)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions

2023

 2 906 
 722
 2 184 
 –   
 11 320
 9 690
 5 063 
 2 371
 1 637
 512
 –   
 128
 1 609
 1 272
 337

 –   
 11 448

2022

 4 232 
 1 858 
 2 374 
 – 
 13 520
 11 591 
 7 658 
 2 025 
 1 444
 318
 – 
 148
 1 803
 1 407
 396

 – 
 13 130 

 124

 123
 1
 11 324
 4 342 
 6 982

114 122
 98 282 
 71 303 
 22 677
 1 637 
 2 414
 123
 128
 15 840
 6 336
 9 504 

 134
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 134
 – 
 12 996
 5 940
 7 056
 – 
 132 562
 113 530
 87 408
 21 987
 1 444
 2 409
 134
 148 
 19 032
 9 206
 9 826
 – 
 29 474,00   33 804,00 
 23 354,00 
 26 716,00 
 3 542,00 
 5 112,00 
 17 984,00 
 19 697,00 
 311,00 
 338,00 
 1 484,00 
 1 529,00 
 2,00 
 9,00 
 31,00 
 30,00 
 6 120,00 
 7 088,00 
 1 337,00 
 2 630,00 
 4 783,00 
 4 458,00 
 – 
 104 589 
 102 582 
 92 032 
 7 724
 2 827 

 100 810 
 99 009 
 88 623 
 8 377 
 2 009 

2021

 2 241
 896 
 1 345
 – 
 13 357
 11 629
 7 394
 2 033
 1 588
 443

 172
 1 727 
 1 353
 378

 – 
 13 899 

 109
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 109
 – 
 13 790
 6 756 
 7 034
 – 
 138 048
 116 933
 89 826
 22 867 
 1 588
 2 377
 109
 166 
 21 115
 9 006 
 12 109
 – 
 31 566,00 
 23 417,00 
 4 907,00 
 16 689,00 
 312,00 
 1 467,00 
 12,00 
 30,00 
 8 149,00 
 3 344,00 
 4 805,00 
 – 
 103 776
 102 107
 92 192
 7 089 
 2 826

 – 
 – 
 12 946 
 10 974
 7 017 
 2 029 
 1 431
 300
 – 
 197
 1 972 
 1 598
 374

 – 
 13 411 

 99 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 99 
 – 
 13 312 
 6 274
 7 035
 3,00 
 142 614
 115 754 
 89 024
 22 774
 1 431
 2 229 
 99 
 197
 26 860
 8 635
 18 222
 3
 31 662,00 
 21 838,00 
 3 709,00 
 16 225,00 
 328,00 
 1 524,00 
 22,00 
 30,00 
 9 824,00 
 3 363,00 
 6 461,00 
 – 
 104 650 
 103 355 
 92 307 
 7 257
 3 790 

Restated 2022

34

35

33
34

Limited

Restated 2022

Limited

Restated 2022

36

2023

 1 801 

 1 801
 – 

 21 159
20 583
7 338
1 091
11 317
204
558
75
576
122

454

5 595

5 574
3 044
665
15 75

290
21
21

2022

 2 007

 2 007 

 – 
 Updated 
 21 231
 20 655
 7 338 
 1 091
 11 389 
 204 
 558
 75
 576 
 122

 454
 – 
 5 595,00 

 5 574,00 
 3 044,00 
 665,00 
 1 575,00 
 – 
 – 
 290,00 
 21,00 
 21,00 
 – 
 – 

2021

 1 669 

 1 669

 – 

 20 812
 20 164
 7 338 
 1 091 
 10 995
 204
 533
 3 
 648 
125

 523
 – 
 6 147,00 

 5 885,00 
 3 044,00 
 665,00 
 1 816,00 
 – 
 – 
 360,00 
 21,00 
 21,00 
 – 

2023
Rm

289 696
219 620
70 076
4 876
74 952
34 688
14 288
10 333
12 925
2 718
74 952
29 073
9,96
2,41
2,58

2023
Rm

Level 3
26,09

2022
Rm

272 746
167 104
105 642
4 148
109 790
33 280
2 765
7 636
16 231
49 878
109 790
28 630
9,63
3,69
3,83

2022
Rm

Level 3
26,48

2021
Rm

201 910
134 873
67 037
1 670
68 707
33 588
1 546
7 638
9 509
16 426
68 707
28 949
6,97
2,32
2,37

2021
Rm

Level 4
23,86

2020

 1 295 

 1 295 

 – 

 20 928
 19 881
 7 338
 1 091 
 10 566
 204 
 533 
 149 
 1 047
 123 

 924 
 – 
 6 147,00 

 6 059,00 
 3 044,00 
 665,00 
 1 990,00 
 – 
 – 
 360,00 
 21,00 
 21,00 
 – 

 – 
 – 

2020
Rm

190 367
247 612
 (57 245)
575
(56 670)
 32 007 
 (132)
 10 823 
 930
 (100 298)
 (56 670)
 31 001
 6,14
 (1,85)
 (1,83)

2020
Rm

 Level3 
 24,17 

LoA 2023

Footnote

Restated
 2020 – 2022

37

Restated 
2021 – 2022

38

Limited

LoA 2023 Footnote

Restated 2022
Restated 2022

LoA 2023 Footnote

 31 191 

 30 376 

 29 073 

 28 743

 Limited 

Land and biodiversity (hectares) 
Surface area affected by operations (hectares)

ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia

North America
Africa

Area dedicated to biodiversity and conservation 
(hectares)
ENERGY
Secunda
Sasolburg
Mining
Natref
Mozambique
Other strategic business units and Functions
CHEMICALS
Eurasia
North America
Africa

Land used for mining (hectare)
Underground mining area
Legal compliance
Fines, penalties and settlements (number)
Fines, penalties and settlements (US$ million)

Natural Capital – Our environment
Value added statement (unaudited)

Turnover
Less: Purchased materials and services
Value added
Finance income
Wealth created/(lost)
Employees
Providers of equity
Providers of loan capital (interest)
Direct taxes paid to government
Reinvested/(Utilised) in Group
Wealth distribution
Number of employees for the year (Group)
Turnover per employee (Rands million)
Value added/(lost) per employee (Rands million)
Wealth created/(lost) per employee (Rands million)

Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment 
(B-BBEE)

B-BBEE verification certificate
Preferential procurement (score out of 27)
Preferential procurement 
from all suppliers

 – 

 – 

 2,32 

63 100

55 800

43 200

 49 400 

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

61

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASANNEXURESINTRODUCTION32. Natref previously reported desalinated water as river water abstracted. Natref obtains 

treated water from Sasolburg operations and this has been included as reported as 
desalinated water from FY23. 

33. This figure previously included water treated by the organisation which should be 

34. Lower values attributed to a transfer of some potable water use accounts to the joint 

reported as recycled water.

venture. 

35. Groundwater use at Ekandustria included from FY23.
36. Water recycled for 2022 restated as it previously included potable water used.
37. The scope for reporting of recycled water was updated to ensure aligned reporting across 

regions. This had a significant impact on values previously reported. Water recycled 
values reported for Chemicals Eurasia previously included cooling water supplied and 
recycled by a utility services provider. To ensure aligned reporting across regions, the 
scope of water recycled for reporting was refined. The scope excludes recycling by utility 
services providers (including cases where water supplied is routed in a looped system). 
The current definition now includes water that is used for the second or more time in an 
operation, process or activity. This includes water that is pumped around in a system in a 
closed loop (but excludes cycles of concentration applied in cooling towers before 
blowdown). Water recycling and reuse can include wastewater recycled back in the same 
process or higher use of recycled water in the process cycle; wastewater recycled and 
reused in a different process, but within the same facility; and wastewater reused at 
another of the organisation’s facilities (processing of used water and wastewater that 
occurs at utility service providers that provide water to Sasol will not be accounted for by 
the organisation). 

38. Additional Eurasian sites started reporting on surface area impacted by operations.
39. The reporting of oxygen use was opted out from June 2021 due to the sale of the Oxygen 
plant to Air Liquide. The flowmeters used to report this KPI prior to June 2021 fell within 
Air Liquide’s battery limit as a result of the sale. Given that flowmeters were no longer 
within Sasol’s battery limit, Secunda Operations could not accurately measure the 
amount of oxygen being used in process. Secunda Operations embarked on a project to 
install meters and initiate mass balance process to accurately measure this KPI. The 
process of data reporting has been tested and put in place for the FY24 reporting cycle.

PERFORMANCE DATA CONTINUED

Footnotes
1.  Employee numbers refers to employees that are assigned to approved Sasol 

organisational structure Staff Establishment positions, including permanent and 
non-permanent structure (Project positions, non-permanent employee positions)  
as well as individuals that exist outside of formally approve Sasol organisational 
structures and are treated based on equity accounting principles e.g. mainly joint 
ventures.

2.  The Recordable Case Rate (RCR) is a measure for reporting work-related injuries. The 
RCR is the number of fatalities, lost workdays cases, restricted workday injuries and 
medical treatment cases for every 200 000 exposure hours worked. Exposure hours 
are defined as the total number of hours the employees or service providers have 
spent in the work environment defined to be Sasol premises where the employee or 
service provider is potentially exposed to harm, while engaged in work activities.

4. 

3.  A fire, explosion or release (FER) incident is registered as Major when: the severity 
index is greater than or equal to 40 or an incident resulting in a fatality or multiple 
hospitalisations will be elevated to a Major FER. Level 2 Incidents: Significant – Severity 
index of greater than or equal to 26, but less than 40. Additional criteria, which will 
elevate an incident to significant: – A Lost Workday Case (LWDC) or a more serious 
injury or Direct financial loss greater than $25 000. Exceeds the CCPS Tier 1 threshold 
quantity for a given hazardous chemical classification. Mining as well as buildings  
(e.g. LPG at Sasol Place) are excluded from the Process Safety KPIs (FERs).
Illnesses are recorded as work-related as a precautionary measure. The various 
evaluation authorities may subsequently classify them as not work-related, in which 
instance they are removed from the records. In addition, service provider illnesses have 
been recorded. Reversible and irreversible occupational diseases are now separated 
and additional reporting categories have been included to enable a comprehensive 
disease overview required for continuous improvement and a proactive approach in 
occupational health management.
Investment in employee learning excludes the compulsory 1% skills levy.

5. 
6.  Black employees refers to African, Coloured and Indian people – for the purposes of 

South African employment equity considerations.

7.  Production – external sales – The boundaries of this figure only include a product that 
is destined for sale to Sasol customers and does not include a product utilised or sold 
between the Sasol Group of companies.

8.  Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions have been calculated and reported in accordance 
with the GHG Protocol (www.ghgprotocol.org) and the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) 2006 Guidelines. In our GHG measurements, we have included 
100% of the emissions for the following joint ventures (JVs): Natref in South Africa and 
Gas Sourcing & Operations in Mozambique. Data for those JVs where we do not have a 
significant influence or operational control is not included. An external assurance 
provider has once again independently verified our direct and indirect emissions levels.

9.  The increase in emissions are attributed to the inclusion of all methane and nitrous 
oxide from stationary emissions. The South African regulations impose mandatory 
reporting of nitrous oxide and methane associated with activities, through the 
utilisation of non-Sasol specific emission factors. In light of the requirement for clear 
and comprehensive emission inventories, a decision has been made to include these 
emissions. Note changes to methane, nitrous oxide, scope 1 will impact on the 
calculation of Direct carbon dioxide (CO2) Scope 1 (CO2 equivalent) and Total greenhouse 
gas (CO2 equivalent).

10.  Methodological changes associated with revised coal bed methane emission factors 

necessitated a restatement of previously reported emissions. Calculation error 
corrected for 2020. 

11.  Methane emissions associated with fuel oil combustion previously excluded for 2020.
12.  The sum of greenhouse gas emissions from methane, nitrous oxides and carbon 

dioxide (Scope 1 only) are expressed as CO2 equivalence emitted and reported as direct 
scope 1 CO2e.

13.  Methodological changes and emission factor updates resulted in marginal changes in 
emission profile. Note the changes to methane, nitrous oxide, scope 1 will impact on 
the calculation of Direct carbon dioxide (CO2) Scope 1 (CO2 equivalent) and Total 
greenhouse gas (CO2 equivalent). 

14.  Methodological improvements as well as detailed site assessments allowed for more 
comprehensive reporting of emissions. Note the changes to methane, nitrous oxide, 
scope 1 will impact on the calculation of Direct carbon dioxide (CO2) Scope 1  
(CO2 equivalent) and Total greenhouse gas (CO2 equivalent). 

15.  Reporting improvement to reflect latest values and ensure concise and comprehensive 

reporting. Note the changes to methane, nitrous oxide, scope 1 will impact on the 
calculation of Direct carbon dioxide (CO2) Scope 1 (CO2 equivalent) and Total greenhouse 
gas (CO2 equivalent). 

16.  Increase attributed to inclusion of steam obtained from the joint venture at Lake Charles 
that was previously excluded. Note the changes to methane, nitrous oxide, scope 1 will 
impact on the calculation of Direct carbon dioxide (CO2) Scope 1 (CO2 equivalent) and 
Total greenhouse gas (CO2 equivalent). 

17.  Off peak demand consumption values were adjusted to Energy Consumption (All). Note 
the changes in scope 2 emissions will impact on Total greenhouse gas (CO2 equivalent) 
calculations.

18.  Green certificates issued to Eurasia resulting in reduction of non-renewable electricity 

and scope 2 emissions. Note the changes in scope 2 emissions will impact on Total 
greenhouse gas (CO2 equivalent) calculations. 

19.  The increase in scope 2 emissions is attributed to the inclusion of steam purchased 

from the joint venture with LyondellBasell.

20. GHG intensity CO2e/ton of product meant for external sale.
21.  This intensity provides insight into the total emissions per ton of product produced 

irrespective of the final destination of these products. This provides a more 
representative view of site intensity irrespective of the nature of the operation.  
The total production values utilised for this calculation is based on operational 
management control and is in line with Sasol’s SD data reporting philosophy which 
excludes subsidiaries and joint ventures at which Sasol has no management control.

22. The reduction in VOC values is attributed to installation of a closed pipe draining 

system at Gas Liquor Separation tanks that replaced open channels – this results in 
reduced evaporative impacts. 

23. For reporting purposes, a waste is hazardous as defined by national legislation at the 

point of generation. In situations with insufficient guidance from legislation, the 
hazardous waste is reported if it is (i) removed from the premises for disposal and/or 
treatment, or (ii) disposed of on-site (e.g. by landfill). These figures exclude coarse ash 
from waste materials left over from manufacturing or consumption, which may be 
reused or recycled. Non-hazardous waste is waste which requires disposal on a general 
waste landfill site.

24. Reporting of steam purchased from both renewable and non-renewable sources 

commenced in FY22. Prior to FY22, all steam purchased was accounted for in  
“Other energy use”.

25. Feedstock to electricity (self-generated) decreased in 2022 as a result of feedstock 

(gas) being diverted from power production to the process. Note changes to methane, 
nitrous oxide, scope 1 will impact on the calculation of Direct carbon dioxide (CO2) 
Scope 1 (CO2 equivalent) and Total greenhouse gas (CO2 equivalent).

26. ROAS steam production commenced in 2023. Note changes to methane, nitrous oxide, 

scope 1 will impact on the calculation of Direct carbon dioxide (CO2) Scope 1  
(CO2 equivalent) and Total greenhouse gas (CO2 equivalent).

27. Mobile fuel reported for some Eurasian sites from 2023.
28. Increased generator fuel use due to loadshedding.
29. Increased service provider activity during turnarounds and plant shutdown with 
additional fuel used for generators and compressors following a process safety 
incident which created additional activity. 

30. Material use KPI definitions have been refined in 2023 for oxygen from air, nitrogen 

from air, natural gas use and other to exclude reporting where it is not used as 
feedstock.

31.  Full eastern factory shutdown resulting in lower water use as well as reduction in 

blowdown that reduced raw water use for cooling. 

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

62

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASANNEXURESINTRODUCTIONINDEPENDENT ASSURANCE PRACTITIONER’S ASSURANCE REPORT ON SELECTED KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS

To the Directors of Sasol Limited

Report on Selected Key Performance Indicators
We have undertaken an assurance engagement on selected key performance indicators (KPIs), as described below and presented in the Sustainability 
Report 2023 of Sasol Limited (“Sasol”) for the year ended 30 June 2023 (the Report). This engagement was conducted by a multidisciplinary team 
including environmental and assurance specialists with relevant experience in sustainability reporting.
Subject Matter
We have been engaged to provide a reasonable assurance opinion on the KPIs listed in Table A and a limited assurance conclusion on the KPIs listed in 
Table B below. The selected KPIs described below have been prepared in accordance with the International Standard of Assurance Engagements 3000 
(Revised), Assurance Engagements Other Than Audits or Reviews of Historic Financial Information (“ISAE 3000 (Revised)”). The reporting criteria is 
available on https://www.sasol.com/investor-centre/sustainability-reporting.
Table A: Reasonable assurance on the following KPIs (marked with a ‘Reasonable’ on the relevant pages in the Report)
Boundary
Key Performance Indictors
Group
Product meant for external sale
Greenhouse gases (GHG): Total Greenhouse Gas (CO2 equivalent)
Group
Greenhouse gases (GHG): Direct carbon dioxide (CO2) Scope 1
Group
Greenhouse gases (GHG): Indirect carbon dioxide (CO2) Scope 2
Group
Group
Greenhouse gases (GHG): Direct methane (CH4)
Greenhouse gases (GHG): Nitrous oxide (N2O)
Group
Greenhouse gases (GHG): GHG intensity (CO2 equivalent/ton product meant  
Group
for external sale)
Total energy use
Total material use

Unit of measurement
Kilotons 
Kilotons
Kilotons
Kilotons
Kilotons
Kilotons
Rate

Thousand gigajoules
Kilotons

Kilotons
Kilotons
Kilotons

Atmospheric emissions: Particulates (fly ash)
Atmospheric emissions: Nitrogen oxides (NOx)
Atmospheric emissions: Sulphur oxides (SOx)
Table B: Limited assurance on the following KPIs (marked with a ‘Limited’ on the relevant pages of the Report)
Key Performance Indictors
Recordable Case Rate (RCR), including employees and service providers
Lost Workday Case Rate (LWDCR), including employees and service providers
Employee and Service Provider Fatalities
Total major and significant fires, explosions and releases (FERs)
Fires, explosions and releases severity rate (FER-SR)
Major and significant road product transport incidents 
Irreversible occupational diseases (IROD)

Unit of measurement
Rate
Rate
Number
Number
Rate
Number
Number

Rate
Thousand cubic meters
Thousand cubic meters
Kilotons
Kilotons
Kilotons
Kilotons
Hectares
Hectares
Rands million
Number

HSI severity rate (HSI-SR)
Total water use
Water recycled
Hazardous waste
Non-hazardous waste
Total waste
Recycled waste
Underground mining area
Area dedicated to biodiversity and conservation
Total skills development expenditure
Workforce diversity (South African gender and race profile)
Directors’ Responsibilities
The Directors are responsible for the selection, preparation and presentation of the selected KPIs in accordance with management’s basis of 
preparation. This responsibility includes the identification of stakeholders and stakeholder requirements, material issues, commitments with respect 
to sustainability performance and design, implementation and maintenance of internal control relevant to the preparation of the Report that is free 
from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error. The Directors are also responsible for determining the appropriateness of the 
measurement and reporting criteria in view of the intended users of the selected KPIs and for ensuring that those criteria are publicly available to the 
Report users.
Inherent Limitations
The Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emission quantification is subject to inherent uncertainty because of incomplete scientific knowledge used to 
determine emissions factors and the values needed to combine emissions of different gases.
Our Independence and Quality Control
We have complied with the independence and other ethical requirements of the Code of Professional Conduct for Registered Auditors issued by the 
Independent Regulatory Board for Auditors (IRBA Code), which is founded on fundamental principles of integrity, objectivity, professional competence 
and due care, confidentiality and professional behaviour. The IRBA Code is consistent with the corresponding sections of the International Ethics 

Group
Group, excluding oxygen 
from air at Secunda 
Operations
Group
Group
Group

Boundary
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group, excluding 
Germany, Italy and 
Slovakia
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
South Africa

Standards Board for Accountants’ International Code of Ethics for 
Professional Accountants (including International Independence Standards).
Deloitte and Tholisiwe apply the International Standard on Quality 
Management 1, which requires the firm to design, implement and operate a 
system of quality management including policies or procedures regarding 
compliance with ethical requirements, professional standards and applicable 
legal and regulatory requirements.
Assurance Practitioner’s Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express either a reasonable assurance opinion or 
limited assurance conclusion on the selected KPIs as set out in section (a) 
and (b) of the Subject Matter paragraph, based on the procedures we have 
performed and the evidence we have obtained. We conducted our 
assurance engagement in accordance with the International Standard on 
Assurance Engagements (ISAE) 3000 (Revised), Assurance Engagements 
other than Audits or Reviews of Historical Financial Information and, in 
respect of greenhouse gas emissions, in accordance with the International 
Standard on Assurance Engagements (ISAE) 3410, Assurance Engagements 
on Greenhouse Gas Statements, issued by the International Auditing and 
Assurance Standards Board. That Standard requires that we plan and 
perform our engagement to obtain the appropriate level of assurance 
about whether the selected KPIs are free from material misstatement
The procedures performed in a limited assurance engagement vary in 
nature and timing and are less in extent than for a reasonable assurance 
engagement. As a result, the level of assurance obtained in a limited 
assurance engagement is substantially lower than the assurance that 
would have been obtained had we performed a reasonable assurance 
engagement.
(a) Reasonable assurance
A reasonable assurance engagement undertaken in accordance with ISAE 
3000 (Revised) and ISAE 3410 involves performing procedures to obtain 
evidence about the measurement of the selected KPIs and related 
disclosures in the Report. The nature, timing and extent of procedures 
selected depend on the auditor’s professional judgement, including the 
assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the selected KPIs, 
whether due to fraud or error.
In making those risk assessments we have considered internal control 
relevant to Sasol’s preparation of the selected KPIs. A reasonable assurance 
engagement also includes:
•  Evaluating the appropriateness of quantification methods, reporting 

policies and internal guidelines used and the reasonableness of 
estimates made by Sasol.

•  Assessing the suitability in the circumstances of Sasol’s use of the 

applicable reporting criteria as a basis for preparing the selected 
information.

•  Evaluating the overall presentation of the selected sustainability 

performance information.

We believe that the evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate 
to provide a basis for our opinion.
(b) Limited assurance
A limited assurance engagement undertaken in accordance with ISAE 3000 
(Revised) and ISAE 3410 involves assessing the suitability in the 
circumstances of Sasol’s use of its reporting criteria as the basis of 
preparation for the selected KPIs, assessing the risks of material 
misstatement of the selected KPIs whether due to fraud or error, responding 
to the assessed risks as necessary in the circumstances and evaluating the 
overall presentation of the selected KPIs. A limited assurance engagement is 
substantially less in scope than a reasonable assurance engagement in 
relation to both risk assessment procedures, including an understanding of 
internal control and the procedures performed in response to the assessed 
risks. Accordingly, for the KPIs where limited assurance was obtained, we do 
not express a reasonable assurance opinion about whether Sasol’s selected 
KPIs have been prepared, in all material respects, in accordance with the 
accompanying Sasol’s reporting criteria.

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

63

The procedures we performed were based on our professional judgement 
and included inquiries, observation of processes followed, inspection of 
documents, analytical procedures, evaluating the appropriateness of 
quantification methods and reporting policies and agreeing or reconciling 
with underlying records.
Given the circumstances of the engagement, in performing the procedures 
listed above we:
• 

Interviewed management and senior executives to obtain an 
understanding of the internal control environment, risk assessment 
process and information systems relevant to the sustainability reporting 
process.
Inspected documentation to corroborate the statements of 
management and senior executives in our interviews.

• 

•  Tested the processes and systems to generate, collate, aggregate, 

monitor and report the selected KPIs.

•  Performed a controls walkthrough of identified key controls.
• 

Inspected supporting documentation on a sample basis and performed 
analytical procedures to evaluate the data generation and reporting 
processes against the reporting criteria.

•  Evaluated whether the selected KPIs presented in the Report are 

consistent with our overall knowledge and experience of sustainability 
management and performance at Sasol.

Reasonable Assurance Opinion and Limited Assurance Conclusion
(a) Reasonable assurance opinion
In our opinion, the selected KPIs set out in section (a) of the Subject Matter 
paragraph above for the year ended 30 June 2023 are prepared, in all 
material respects, in accordance with the reporting criteria.
(b) Limited Assurance Conclusion
Based on the procedures we have performed and the evidence we have 
obtained, nothing has come to our attention that causes us to believe that 
the selected KPIs as set out in section (b) of the Subject Matter paragraph 
above for the year ended 30 June 2023 are not prepared, in all material 
respects, in accordance with the reporting criteria.
Other Matters
The maintenance and integrity of Sasol‘s website is the responsibility of 
Sasol‘s management. Our procedures did not involve consideration of these 
matters and, accordingly, we accept no responsibility for any changes to 
either the information in the Report or our independent limited assurance 
report that may have occurred since the initial date of its presentation on 
Sasol‘s website.
Restriction of Liability
Our work has been undertaken to enable us to express a limited assurance 
conclusion on the selected KPIs to the Directors of Sasol in accordance with 
the terms of our engagement and for no other purpose. We do not accept or 
assume liability to any party other than Sasol, for our work, for this report, 
or for the conclusion we have reached.

Deloitte & Touche
Registered Auditors
Per Jayne Mammatt
Chartered Accountant (SA)
Registered Auditor
Partner
30 August 2023
5 Magwa Crescent
Waterfall City, Waterfall
Private Bag X6, Gallo Manor, 2052
South Africa

Tholisiwe Chartered  
Accountants Inc
Registered Auditors
Per Georgina Tekie 
Chartered Accountant (SA)
Registered Auditor
Chief Executive Officer
30 August 2023
169 Garsfontein Road
Ashlea Gardens, 
Pretoria, South Africa

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASANNEXURESINTRODUCTIONDISCLAIMER

Forward-looking statements
Sasol may, in this document, make certain statements that are not historical facts and relate to analyses and other 
information which are based on forecasts of future results and estimates of amounts not yet determinable. These 
statements may also relate to our future prospects, expectations, developments and business strategies. Examples 
of such forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, the impact of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) 
pandemic and measures taken in response, on Sasol’s business, results of operations, markets, employees, financial 
condition and liquidity; the effectiveness of any actions taken by Sasol to address or limit any impact of COVID-19 on 
its business; the capital cost of our projects and the timing of project milestones; our ability to obtain financing to 
meet the funding requirements of our capital investment programme, as well as to fund our ongoing business 
activities and to pay dividends; statements regarding our future results of operations and financial condition and 
regarding future economic performance including cost containment, cash conservation programmes and business 
optimisation initiatives; recent and proposed accounting pronouncements and their impact on our future results of 
operations and financial condition; our business strategy, performance outlook, plans, objectives or goals; 
statements regarding future competition, volume growth and changes in market share in the industries and markets 
for our products; our existing or anticipated investments, acquisitions of new businesses or the disposal of existing 
businesses, including estimates or projection of internal rates of return and future profitability; our estimated oil, 
gas and coal reserves; the probable future outcome of litigation, legislative, regulatory and fiscal developments, 
including statements regarding our ability to comply with future laws and regulations; future fluctuations in refining 
margins and crude oil, natural gas and petroleum and chemical product prices; the demand, pricing and cyclicality of 
oil, gas and petrochemical product prices; changes in the fuel and gas pricing mechanisms in South Africa and their 
effects on prices, our operating results and profitability; statements regarding future fluctuations in exchange and 
interest rates and changes in credit ratings; total shareholder return; our current or future products and anticipated 
customer demand for these products; assumptions relating to macroeconomics; climate change impacts and our 
climate change strategies, our development of sustainability within our Energy and Chemicals Businesses, our 
energy efficiency improvement, carbon and GHG emission reduction targets, our net zero carbon emissions ambition 
and future low-carbon initiatives, including relating to green hydrogen and sustainable aviation fuel;  
our estimated carbon tax liability; cyber security; and statements of assumptions underlying such statements. 
Words such as “believe”, “anticipate”, “expect”, “intend", “seek”, “will”, “plan”, “could”, “may”, “endeavour”, 
“target”, “forecast” and “project” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements but 
are not the exclusive means of identifying such statements. By their very nature, forward-looking statements 
involve inherent risks and uncertainties, both general and specific and there are risks that the predictions, forecasts, 
projections and other forward-looking statements will not be achieved. If one or more of these risks materialise,  
or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated.  
You should understand that a number of important factors could cause actual results to differ materially from the 
plans, objectives, expectations, estimates and intentions expressed in such forward-looking statements. These 
factors and others are discussed more fully in our most recent annual report on Form 20-F filed on 1 September 2022 
and in other filings with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission. The list of factors discussed therein 
is not exhaustive; when relying on forward-looking statements to make investment decisions, you should carefully 
consider foregoing factors and other uncertainties and events and you should not place undue reliance on 
forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements apply only as of the date on which they are made and we 
do not undertake any obligation to update or revise any of them, whether as a result of new information, future 
events or otherwise.

Comprehensive additional information is available on our website: www.sasol.com
Photography
Photographs used in this report, have been sourced from our photographic library.

Photographs used from stock libraries have been sourced with relevant licences.

©Sasol Limited
Copyright subsists in this work. No part of this work may be reproduced in any form or by any means without 
Sasol Limited’s written permission. Any unauthorised reproduction of this work will constitute a copyright 
infringement and render the doer liable under both civil and criminal law. Sasol is a registered trademark.

ADMINISTRATION

Contact details 
Postal and electronic addresses 
and telecommunication numbers
Private Bag X10014, Sandton 2146 
Republic of South Africa
Telephone: +27 (0) 10 344 5000 
Website: www.sasol.com

Company registration number
1979/003231/06

ABBREVIATIONS

Website
www.sasol.com

Business address and registered office
Sasol Place
50 Katherine Street, Sandton 2196
Republic of South Africa

ABAC
ABLC
B-BBEE
BFA
BHR
Board
CAIA
COD
COP
CSUM
DEI&B
DWS
ECD
EE
EmpVP
EnEf
EnMS
EP100
ESD
ESPs
GDP
GRI
GSO
HAZMAT
HDP
HIS-SR
ICCA
ILO
IPP
ISCC
IVRS
IWBF
KPI
LWDCR
MES
Natref
NBI 

Anti-bribery and corruption
African leadership business coalitions
Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment 
Biodiversity footprint assessment
Business and Human Rights
Sasol Limited Board
Chemical Allied Industry Association
Chemical oxygen demand
Communication of Progress
Centre for shared value management
Diversity, equity, inclusion and belonging
Department of Water and Sanitation (South Africa)
Early childhood development
Employment equity
Employer value proposition
Energy efficiency
Energy Management System
Energy productivity 100
Enterprise Supplier Development
Electrostatic precipitators 
Graduate development programme
Global Reporting Initiative
Gas sourcing operations
Hazardous material
Historically disadvantaged persons
High severity injury severity rate
Council of Chemical Associations
International Labour Organisation
Independent Power Producers
International Sustainability and Carbon Certification
Integrated Vaal River System
International Wheelchair Basketball Federations
Key performance indicators
Lost workday case rate
Minimum Emissions Standard
National Petroleum Refiners of South Africa
National Business Initiative

NGO
NOx
OE
OME
Ops
Our Code
PM
PPE
PSM
PwD
RPs
Sasol 
League
SD
SDGs
SEDA
SEO
SHE
SI
SME
SMME
SO
SO2
SSEC
STEM
TCFD
THP
TIG
TIoP
TNFD
TVET
TVOCs
UNGC
VOC
WBSA
WCO
WUL 

Non-Governmental Organisations
Nitrogen Oxides
Operational excellence
Operating model entities
Operating platforms
Code of Conduct
Particulate matters
Personal protection equipment
Process safety management
People with disabilities
Regional platforms
Sasol Provincial Woman’s League

Sustainability Data
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals
Small Enterprise Development Agency
State owned enterprise
Safety, health and environment
Social investment
Small to medium enterprises
Small medium and micro enterprises
Sulphur oxide
Sulphur dioxide
Safety, Social and Ethics Committee
Science, technology, engineering and materials 
Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosure
Thermal hydrolysis process
Tungsten Inert Gas
Transport indicators of performance
Task Force on Nature-related Financial Disclosure
Technical vocational education and training
Total volatile organic compounds
United Nations Global Compact
Volatile organic compound
Wheelchair Basketball South Africa
World class operations
Water use license

SASOL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2023

64

DATA AND ASSURANCESUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR FOCUS AREASANNEXURESINTRODUCTIONwww.sasol.com

